Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
29 , one of the oldest surviving fragments of Euclid 's Elements , a textbook used for millennia to teach proof-writing techniques.
The diagram accompanies Book II, Proposition 5.
A mathematical proof is a deductive  argument for a mathematical statement , showing that the stated assumptions logically guarantee the conclusion.
The argument may use other previously established statements, such as theorems ; but every proof can, in principle, be constructed using only certain basic or original assumptions known as axioms ,    along with the accepted rules of inference .
Proofs are examples of exhaustive deductive reasoning which establish logical certainty, to be distinguished from empirical arguments or non-exhaustive inductive reasoning which establish "reasonable expectation".
Presenting many cases in which the statement holds is not enough for a proof, which must demonstrate that the statement is true in all possible cases.
A proposition that has not been proved but is believed to be true is known as a conjecture , or a hypothesis if frequently used as an assumption for further mathematical work.
Proofs employ logic expressed in mathematical symbols, along with natural language which usually admits some ambiguity.
In most mathematical literature, proofs are written in terms of rigorous  informal logic .
Purely formal proofs , written fully in symbolic language without the involvement of natural language, are considered in proof theory .
The distinction between formal and informal proofs has led to much examination of current and historical mathematical practice , quasi-empiricism in mathematics , and so-called folk mathematics , oral traditions in the mainstream mathematical community or in other cultures.
The philosophy of mathematics is concerned with the role of language and logic in proofs, and mathematics as a language .
History and etymology   See also: History of logic  The word "proof" comes from the Latin probare (to test).
Related modern words are English "probe", "probation", and "probability", Spanish probar (to smell or taste, or sometimes touch or test),  Italian provare (to try), and German probieren (to try).
The legal term "probity" means authority or credibility, the power of testimony to prove facts when given by persons of reputation or status.
Plausibility arguments using heuristic devices such as pictures and analogies preceded strict mathematical proof.
It is likely that the idea of demonstrating a conclusion first arose in connection with geometry , which originated in practical problems of land measurement.
The development of mathematical proof is primarily the product of ancient Greek mathematics , and one of its greatest achievements.
Thales (624–546 BCE) and Hippocrates of Chios (c.
470–410 BCE) gave some of the first known proofs of theorems in geometry.
Eudoxus (408–355 BCE) and Theaetetus (417–369 BCE) formulated theorems but did not prove them.
Aristotle (384–322 BCE) said definitions should describe the concept being defined in terms of other concepts already known.
Mathematical proof was revolutionized by Euclid (300 BCE), who introduced the axiomatic method still in use today.
It starts with undefined terms and axioms , propositions concerning the undefined terms which are assumed to be self-evidently true (from Greek "axios", something worthy).
From this basis, the method proves theorems using deductive logic .
Euclid's book, the Elements , was read by anyone who was considered educated in the West until the middle of the 20th century.
In addition to theorems of geometry, such as the Pythagorean theorem , the Elements also covers number theory , including a proof that the square root of two is irrational and a proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers .
Further advances also took place in medieval Islamic mathematics .
In the 10th century CE, the Iraqi mathematician Al-Hashimi worked with numbers as such, called "lines" but not necessarily considered as measurements of geometric objects, to prove algebraic propositions concerning multiplication, division, etc., including the existence of irrational numbers .
An inductive proof for arithmetic sequences was introduced in the Al-Fakhri (1000) by Al-Karaji , who used it to prove the binomial theorem and properties of Pascal's triangle .
Modern proof theory treats proofs as inductively defined data structures , not requiring an assumption that axioms are "true" in any sense.
This allows parallel mathematical theories as formal models of a given intuitive concept, based on alternate sets of axioms, for example Axiomatic set theory and Non-Euclidean geometry .
Nature and purpose   As practiced, a proof is expressed in natural language and is a rigorous argument intended to convince the audience of the truth of a statement.
The standard of rigor is not absolute and has varied throughout history.
A proof can be presented differently depending on the intended audience.
To gain acceptance, a proof has to meet communal standards of rigor; an argument considered vague or incomplete may be rejected.
The concept of proof is formalized in the field of mathematical logic .
A formal proof is written in a formal language instead of natural language.
A formal proof is a sequence of formulas in a formal language, starting with an assumption, and with each subsequent formula a logical consequence of the preceding ones.
This definition makes the concept of proof amenable to study.
Indeed, the field of proof theory studies formal proofs and their properties, the most famous and surprising being that almost all axiomatic systems can generate certain undecidable statements not provable within the system.
The definition of a formal proof is intended to capture the concept of proofs as written in the practice of mathematics.
The soundness of this definition amounts to the belief that a published proof can, in principle, be converted into a formal proof.
However, outside the field of automated proof assistants , this is rarely done in practice.
A classic question in philosophy asks whether mathematical proofs are analytic or synthetic .
Kant , who introduced the analytic–synthetic distinction , believed mathematical proofs are synthetic, whereas Quine argued in his 1951 " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " that such a distinction is untenable.
Proofs may be admired for their mathematical beauty .
The mathematician Paul Erdős was known for describing proofs which he found to be particularly elegant as coming from "The Book", a hypothetical tome containing the most beautiful method(s) of proving each theorem.
The book Proofs from THE BOOK , published in 2003, is devoted to presenting 32 proofs its editors find particularly pleasing.
Methods of proof   Direct proof   Main article: Direct proof  In direct proof, the conclusion is established by logically combining the axioms, definitions, and earlier theorems.
For example, direct proof can be used to prove that the sum of two even  integers is always even:  Consider two even integers x and y .
Since they are even, they can be written as x = 2 a and y = 2 b , respectively, for some integers a and b .
Then the sum is x + y = 2 a + 2 b = 2( a + b ).
Therefore x + y has 2 as a factor and, by definition, is even.
Hence, the sum of any two even integers is even.
This proof uses the definition of even integers, the integer properties of closure under addition and multiplication, and the distributive property .
Proof by mathematical induction   Main article: Mathematical induction  Despite its name, mathematical induction is a method of deduction , not a form of inductive reasoning .
In proof by mathematical induction, a single "base case" is proved, and an "induction rule" is proved that establishes that any arbitrary case implies the next case.
Since in principle the induction rule can be applied repeatedly (starting from the proved base case), it follows that all (usually infinitely many) cases are provable.
This avoids having to prove each case individually.
A variant of mathematical induction is proof by infinite descent , which can be used, for example, to prove the irrationality of the square root of two .
A common application of proof by mathematical induction is to prove that a property known to hold for one number holds for all natural numbers :  Let N = {1, 2, 3, 4, ...
} be the set of natural numbers, and let P ( n ) be a mathematical statement involving the natural number n belonging to N such that  (i)  P (1) is true, i.e., P ( n ) is true for n = 1 .
(ii)  P ( n +1) is true whenever P ( n ) is true, i.e., P ( n ) is true implies that P ( n +1) is true.
Then P ( n ) is true for all natural numbers n .
For example, we can prove by induction that all positive integers of the form 2 n − 1 are odd .
Let P ( n ) represent " 2 n − 1 is odd":  (i) For n = 1 , 2 n − 1 = 2(1) − 1 = 1 , and 1 is odd, since it leaves a remainder of 1 when divided by 2 .
Thus P (1) is true.
(ii) For any n , if 2 n − 1 is odd ( P ( n ) ), then (2 n − 1) + 2 must also be odd, because adding 2 to an odd number results in an odd number.
But (2 n − 1) + 2 = 2 n + 1 = 2( n +1) − 1 , so 2( n +1) − 1 is odd ( P ( n +1) ).
So P ( n ) implies P ( n +1) .
Thus  2 n − 1 is odd, for all positive integers n .
The shorter phrase "proof by induction" is often used instead of "proof by mathematical induction".
Proof by contraposition   Main article: Contraposition  Proof by contraposition  infers the statement "if p then q " by establishing the logically equivalent  contrapositive statement : "if not q then not p ".
For example, contraposition can be used to establish that, given an integer     x    {\displaystyle x}   , if      x   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}}   is even, then     x    {\displaystyle x}   is even:  Suppose     x    {\displaystyle x}   is not even.
Then     x    {\displaystyle x}   is odd.
The product of two odd numbers is odd, hence      x   2    =  x  ⋅  x    {\displaystyle x^{2}=x\cdot x}   is odd.
Thus      x   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}}   is not even.
Thus, if      x   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}}    is even, the supposition must be false, so     x    {\displaystyle x}   has to be even.
Proof by contradiction   Main article: Proof by contradiction  In proof by contradiction, also known by the Latin phrase reductio ad absurdum (by reduction to the absurd), it is shown that if some statement is assumed true, a logical contradiction occurs, hence the statement must be false.
A famous example involves the proof that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is an irrational number :  Suppose that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   were a rational number.
Then it could be written in lowest terms as       2    =    a  b      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}={a \over b}}   where a and b are non-zero integers with no common factor .
Thus,     b    2    =  a    {\displaystyle b{\sqrt {2}}=a}   .
Squaring both sides yields 2 b 2 = a 2 .
Since the expression on the left is an integer multiple of 2, the right expression is by definition divisible by 2.
That is, a 2 is even, which implies that a must also be even, as seen in the proposition above (in #Proof by contraposition ).
So we can write a = 2 c , where c is also an integer.
Substitution into the original equation yields 2 b 2 = (2 c ) 2 = 4 c 2 .
Dividing both sides by 2 yields b 2 = 2 c 2 .
But then, by the same argument as before, 2 divides b 2 , so b must be even.
However, if a and b are both even, they have 2 as a common factor.
This contradicts our previous statement that a and b have no common factor, so we must conclude that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is an irrational number.
To paraphrase: if one could write       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   as a fraction , this fraction could never be written in lowest terms, since 2 could always be factored from numerator and denominator.
Proof by construction   Main article: Proof by construction  Proof by construction, or proof by example, is the construction of a concrete example with a property to show that something having that property exists.
Joseph Liouville , for instance, proved the existence of transcendental numbers by constructing an explicit example .
It can also be used to construct a counterexample to disprove a proposition that all elements have a certain property.
Proof by exhaustion   Main article: Proof by exhaustion  In proof by exhaustion, the conclusion is established by dividing it into a finite number of cases and proving each one separately.
The number of cases sometimes can become very large.
For example, the first proof of the four color theorem was a proof by exhaustion with 1,936 cases.
This proof was controversial because the majority of the cases were checked by a computer program, not by hand.
The shortest known proof of the four color theorem as of 2011  still has over 600 cases.
Probabilistic proof   Main article: Probabilistic method  A probabilistic proof is one in which an example is shown to exist, with certainty, by using methods of probability theory .
Probabilistic proof, like proof by construction, is one of many ways to prove existence theorems .
In the probabilistic method, one seeks an object having a given property, starting with a large set of candidates.
One assigns a certain probability for each candidate to be chosen, and then proves that there is a non-zero probability that a chosen candidate will have the desired property.
This does not specify which candidates have the property, but the probability could not be positive without at least one.
A probabilistic proof is not to be confused with an argument that a theorem is 'probably' true, a 'plausibility argument'.
The work toward the Collatz conjecture shows how far plausibility is from genuine proof, as does the disproof of the Mertens conjecture .
While most mathematicians do not think that probabilistic evidence for the properties of a given object counts as a genuine mathematical proof, a few mathematicians and philosophers have argued that at least some types of probabilistic evidence (such as Rabin's probabilistic algorithm for testing primality ) are as good as genuine mathematical proofs.
Combinatorial proof   Main article: Combinatorial proof  A combinatorial proof establishes the equivalence of different expressions by showing that they count the same object in different ways.
Often a bijection between two sets is used to show that the expressions for their two sizes are equal.
Alternatively, a double counting argument provides two different expressions for the size of a single set, again showing that the two expressions are equal.
Nonconstructive proof   Main article: Nonconstructive proof  A nonconstructive proof establishes that a mathematical object with a certain property exists—without explaining how such an object can be found.
Often, this takes the form of a proof by contradiction in which the nonexistence of the object is proved to be impossible.
In contrast, a constructive proof establishes that a particular object exists by providing a method of finding it.
The following famous example of a nonconstructive proof shows that there exist two irrational numbers  a and b such that      a   b      {\displaystyle a^{b}}   is a rational number .
This proof uses that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational (an easy proof is known since Euclid ), but not that        2      2       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational (this is true, but the proof is not elementary).
Either        2      2       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   is a rational number and we are done (take     a  =  b  =    2      {\displaystyle a=b={\sqrt {2}}}   ), or        2      2       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational so we can write     a  =     2      2       {\displaystyle a={\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   and     b  =    2      {\displaystyle b={\sqrt {2}}}   .
This then gives       (     2      2     )     2     =     2     2    =  2    {\displaystyle \left({\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}\right)^{\sqrt {2}}={\sqrt {2}}^{2}=2}   , which is thus a rational number of the form      a   b    .
{\displaystyle a^{b}.}
Statistical proofs in pure mathematics   Main article: Statistical proof  The expression "statistical proof" may be used technically or colloquially in areas of pure mathematics , such as involving cryptography , chaotic series , and probabilistic number theory or analytic number theory .
It is less commonly used to refer to a mathematical proof in the branch of mathematics known as mathematical statistics .
See also the " Statistical proof using data " section below.
Computer-assisted proofs   Main article: Computer-assisted proof  Until the twentieth century it was assumed that any proof could, in principle, be checked by a competent mathematician to confirm its validity.
However, computers are now used both to prove theorems and to carry out calculations that are too long for any human or team of humans to check; the first proof of the four color theorem is an example of a computer-assisted proof.
Some mathematicians are concerned that the possibility of an error in a computer program or a run-time error in its calculations calls the validity of such computer-assisted proofs into question.
In practice, the chances of an error invalidating a computer-assisted proof can be reduced by incorporating redundancy and self-checks into calculations, and by developing multiple independent approaches and programs.
Errors can never be completely ruled out in case of verification of a proof by humans either, especially if the proof contains natural language and requires deep mathematical insight to uncover the potential hidden assumptions and fallacies involved.
Undecidable statements   A statement that is neither provable nor disprovable from a set of axioms is called undecidable (from those axioms).
One example is the parallel postulate , which is neither provable nor refutable from the remaining axioms of Euclidean geometry .
Mathematicians have shown there are many statements that are neither provable nor disprovable in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC), the standard system of set theory in mathematics (assuming that ZFC is consistent); see List of statements undecidable in ZFC .
Gödel's (first) incompleteness theorem shows that many axiom systems of mathematical interest will have undecidable statements.
Heuristic mathematics and experimental mathematics   Main article: Experimental mathematics  While early mathematicians such as Eudoxus of Cnidus did not use proofs, from Euclid to the foundational mathematics developments of the late 19th and 20th centuries, proofs were an essential part of mathematics.
With the increase in computing power in the 1960s, significant work began to be done investigating mathematical objects beyond the proof-theorem framework,  in experimental mathematics .
Early pioneers of these methods intended the work ultimately to be resolved into a classical proof-theorem framework, e.g.
the early development of fractal geometry ,  which was ultimately so resolved.
Related concepts   Visual proof   Although not a formal proof, a visual demonstration of a mathematical theorem is sometimes called a " proof without words ".
The left-hand picture below is an example of a historic visual proof of the Pythagorean theorem in the case of the (3,4,5) triangle .
Visual proof for the (3,4,5) triangle as in the Zhoubi Suanjing 500–200 BCE.
Animated visual proof for the Pythagorean theorem by rearrangement.
A second animated proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
Some illusory visual proofs, such as the missing square puzzle , can be constructed in a way which appear to prove a supposed mathematical fact but only do so by neglecting tiny errors (for example, supposedly straight lines which actually bend slightly) which are unnoticeable until the entire picture is closely examined, with lengths and angles precisely measured or calculated.
Elementary proof   Main article: Elementary proof  An elementary proof is a proof which only uses basic techniques.
More specifically, the term is used in number theory to refer to proofs that make no use of complex analysis .
For some time it was thought that certain theorems, like the prime number theorem , could only be proved using "higher" mathematics.
However, over time, many of these results have been reproved using only elementary techniques.
Two-column proof   A two-column proof published in 1913  A particular way of organising a proof using two parallel columns is often used as a mathematical exercise in elementary geometry classes in the United States.
The proof is written as a series of lines in two columns.
In each line, the left-hand column contains a proposition, while the right-hand column contains a brief explanation of how the corresponding proposition in the left-hand column is either an axiom, a hypothesis, or can be logically derived from previous propositions.
The left-hand column is typically headed "Statements" and the right-hand column is typically headed "Reasons".
Colloquial use of "mathematical proof"   The expression "mathematical proof" is used by lay people to refer to using mathematical methods or arguing with mathematical objects , such as numbers, to demonstrate something about everyday life, or when data used in an argument is numerical.
It is sometimes also used to mean a "statistical proof" (below), especially when used to argue from data.
Statistical proof using data   Main article: Statistical proof  "Statistical proof" from data refers to the application of statistics, data analysis , or Bayesian analysis to infer propositions regarding the probability of data.
While using mathematical proof to establish theorems in statistics, it is usually not a mathematical proof in that the assumptions from which probability statements are derived require empirical evidence from outside mathematics to verify.
In physics, in addition to statistical methods, "statistical proof" can refer to the specialized mathematical methods of physics applied to analyze data in a particle physics experiment or observational study in physical cosmology .
"Statistical proof" may also refer to raw data or a convincing diagram involving data, such as scatter plots , when the data or diagram is adequately convincing without further analysis.
Inductive logic proofs and Bayesian analysis   Main articles: Inductive logic and Bayesian analysis  Proofs using inductive logic , while considered mathematical in nature, seek to establish propositions with a degree of certainty, which acts in a similar manner to probability , and may be less than full certainty .
Inductive logic should not be confused with mathematical induction .
Bayesian analysis uses Bayes' theorem to update a person's assessment of likelihoods of hypotheses when new evidence or information is acquired.
Proofs as mental objects   Main articles: Psychologism and Language of thought  Psychologism views mathematical proofs as psychological or mental objects.
Mathematician philosophers, such as Leibniz , Frege , and Carnap have variously criticized this view and attempted to develop a semantics for what they considered to be the language of thought , whereby standards of mathematical proof might be applied to empirical science .
Influence of mathematical proof methods outside mathematics   Philosopher-mathematicians such as Spinoza have attempted to formulate philosophical arguments in an axiomatic manner, whereby mathematical proof standards could be applied to argumentation in general philosophy.
Other mathematician-philosophers have tried to use standards of mathematical proof and reason, without empiricism, to arrive at statements outside of mathematics, but having the certainty of propositions deduced in a mathematical proof, such as Descartes ' cogito argument.
Ending a proof   Main article: Q.E.D.
Sometimes, the abbreviation "Q.E.D."
is written to indicate the end of a proof.
This abbreviation stands for "quod erat demonstrandum" , which is Latin for "that which was to be demonstrated" .
A more common alternative is to use a square or a rectangle, such as □ or ∎, known as a " tombstone " or "halmos" after its eponym  Paul Halmos .
Often, "which was to be shown" is verbally stated when writing "QED", "□", or "∎" during an oral presentation.
Unicode explicitly provides the "end of proof" character, U+220E (∎) (220E(hex) = 8718(dec)) .
Welcome to Wikipedia ,  the free  encyclopedia that anyone can edit .
6,813,549 articles in English      From today's featured article    Fleetwood Mac's Stevie Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham in 2003   Rumours is the 11th studio album by the British-American rock band Fleetwood Mac  (two band members pictured) .
Released in 1977 by Warner Bros.
Records , it was produced by the band with Ken Caillat and Richard Dashut .
Following the band's 1975 album Fleetwood Mac , Rumours includes a mix of electric and acoustic instrumentation, accented rhythms, guitars, and keyboards.
The lyrics, written in the aftermath of several breakups among the band members, concern personal and often troubled relationships.
Rumours became the band's first number-one album on the UK Albums Chart and topped the US Billboard 200 , supported by the singles " Go Your Own Way ", " Dreams ", " Don't Stop ", and " You Make Loving Fun ".
It sold more than 40 million copies worldwide and garnered widespread acclaim from critics, with praise centred on its production quality and vocal harmonies .
In 2020, Rumours was ranked seventh in Rolling Stone ' s list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time ".
( Full article...
)  Recently featured:  William T.
Stearn  One of the Boys (1989 TV series)  Walt Whitman's lectures on Abraham Lincoln    Archive  By email  More featured articles  About   Did you know ...
    Ivanka Trump   ...
that in 2017 Ivanka Trump  (pictured) became the first Jewish member of a U.S. first family ?
...
that in 1933 Nazi sympathisers attempted to kidnap two German-Jewish filmmakers in Liechtenstein?
...
that Fredy Clue designed Sweden's first unisex folk costume ?
...
that 1.2 million people are diagnosed with prostate cancer per year and 350,000 people die from it?
...
that five men were accused of lynching Norris Dendy but none were ever indicted?
...
that while the lichen species Enchylium conglomeratum is considered secure globally, it has been designated as extinct in the UK and regionally extinct in Switzerland?
...
that Jordan Murphy finished his college career ranked second in Big Ten Conference career rebounds , behind Jerry Lucas ?
...
that a section of Interstate 65 in Tennessee was the first part of the Interstate Highway System to open in the state?
...
that the archaeologist Stanley Casson was almost captured – twice – during World War II ?
Archive  Start a new article  Nominate an article      In the news    Børsen in 2010   The historic Børsen  (pictured) in Copenhagen , Denmark, catches fire.
In retaliation for an Israeli airstrike on the Iranian consulate in Damascus , Iran conducts missile and drone strikes against Israel.
In the South Korean legislative election , the Democratic Party –led opposition alliance increases its majority in parliament.
American football Hall of Fame running back, murder suspect and convicted criminal O.
J.
Simpson dies at the age of 76 .
Simon Harris becomes Taoiseach of Ireland after Leo Varadkar 's resignation.
Ongoing :  Israel–Hamas war  Myanmar civil war  Red Sea crisis  Russian invasion of Ukraine  timeline  War in Sudan  timeline  Recent deaths :  Carl Erskine  Derek Underwood  Fritz Peterson  Beverly LaHaye  Anna-Greta Leijon  Trina Robbins   Nominate an article   On this day   April 17 : Evacuation Day in Syria ( 1946 )    Modern reconstruction of Kaunas Castle   1362 – Lithuanian Crusade : After a month-long siege , forces of the Teutonic Order captured and destroyed Kaunas Castle  (reconstruction pictured) , which was defended by troops of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania .
1783 – The Mechanical Turk , a fraudulent chess -playing "machine" by Wolfgang von Kempelen that was secretly controlled by a hidden human, began a tour of Europe.
1809 – Napoleonic Wars : After a three-day chase, the French ship D'Hautpoul was captured off Puerto Rico by a British squadron under Alexander Cochrane .
1973 – George Lucas began writing a 13-page film treatment that later formed the basis of Star Wars .
1984 – Metropolitan Police officer Yvonne Fletcher was shot and killed while on duty during a protest outside the Libyan embassy in London, resulting in an 11-day police siege of the building and a breakdown of Libya–United Kingdom relations .
Eliza Acton ( b.
1799) Sirimavo Bandaranaike ( b.
1916) Ralph Abernathy ( d.
1990)  More anniversaries:  April 16  April 17  April 18    Archive  By email  List of days of the year      Today's featured picture       The American white pelican ( Pelecanus erythrorhynchos ) is a large aquatic soaring bird from the order Pelecaniformes .
It breeds in interior North America, moving south and to the coasts, as far as Costa Rica, in winter.
Along with the trumpeter swan , it is one of the longest birds native to North America, with an overall length of about 50 to 70 inches (130 to 180 cm).
The beak measures 11.3 to 15.2 inches (290 to 390 mm) in males and 10.3 to 14.2 inches (260 to 360 mm) in females, while its wingspan is around 95 to 120 inches (240 to 300 cm).
The American white pelican does not dive for its food as some other pelican species do, instead catching its prey while swimming.
Each bird eats more than 4 pounds (1.8 kg) of food a day, predominantly fish, which ranges from the size of minnows to 3.5-pound (1.6 kg) pickerels .
This adult American white pelican in non-breeding plumage was photographed at Las Gallinas Wildlife Ponds in San Rafael, California .
Photograph credit: Frank Schulenburg  Recently featured:  Jean Ignace Isidore Gérard  Notre-Dame fire  Nassarius arcularia    Archive  More featured pictures      Other areas of Wikipedia   Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements.
Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues.
Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement.
Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia.
Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics.
Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia.
Wikipedia's sister projects   Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects :      Commons Free media repository     MediaWiki Wiki software development     Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination     Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals     Wikidata Free knowledge base     Wikinews Free-content news     Wikiquote Collection of quotations     Wikisource Free-content library     Wikispecies Directory of species     Wikiversity Free learning tools     Wikivoyage Free travel guide     Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus     Wikipedia languages    This Wikipedia is written in English .
Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below.
1,000,000+ articles     العربية  مصرى  Deutsch  Español  Français  Italiano  Nederlands  日本語  Polski  Português  Русский  Svenska  Українська  Tiếng Việt  中文       250,000+ articles     Bahasa Indonesia  Bahasa Melayu  Bân-lâm-gú  Български  Català  Čeština  Dansk  Esperanto  Euskara  فارسی ‎  עברית  Հայերեն  한국어  Magyar  Norsk bokmål  Română  Simple English  Srpski  Srpskohrvatski  Suomi  Türkçe  Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча       50,000+ articles     Asturianu  Azərbaycanca  বাংলা  Bosanski  کوردی  Eesti  Ελληνικά  Frysk  Gaeilge  Galego  Hrvatski  ქართული  Kurdî  Latviešu  Lietuvių  മലയാളം  Македонски  မြန်မာဘာသာ  Norsk nynorsk  ਪੰਜਾਬੀ  Shqip  Slovenčina  Slovenščina  ไทย  తెలుగు  اردو           Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1212457119 "List of Wikipedia's tables of contents     Overviews  Outlines  Lists  Portals  Glossaries  Categories  Vital articles  Featured content  Good articles  Indices  A–Z index    Reference  Culture  Geography  Health  History  Human activities  Mathematics  Nature  People  Philosophy  Religion  Society  Technology    This page lists Wikipedia's tables of contents.
For Wikipedia's community directory, see Wikipedia:Directories and indexes .
Shortcuts WP:START WP:EXPLORE   Explore the vast knowledge of Wikipedia through these helpful resources.
If you have a specific topic in mind, use Wikipedia's search box.
If you don't know exactly what you are looking for or wish to explore broad areas, click on a link in the header menu at the top of this page, or begin your browsing below:  Navigating Wikipedia's subjects  Wikipedia organizes its content into distinct subject classifications, each with further subdivisions.
Culture  Explore the diverse cultures, arts, beliefs, and customs of human societies.
Culture  Geography  Discover the wonders of Earth's lands, features, inhabitants, and planetary phenomena.
Geography  Health  Learn about physical, mental, and social well-being.
Health  History  Dive into the past through written records and scholarly exploration.
History  Timelines  Explore chronological events through our comprehensive timelines.
List of timelines  Current history entries  Stay up-to-date with encyclopedia entries covering ongoing events.
2024 – Major events this year  2024 in science – Ongoing science findings and technology advancements  Portal:Current events – Featured current events and related project activities  Human activities  Delve into diverse human actions, from leisure and entertainment to industry and warfare.
Human activities  Mathematics and formal sciences  Explore the study of quantity, structure, space, and change.
Mathematics and logic  Natural sciences  Understand natural phenomena through empirical evidence, observations, and experiments.
Natural and physical sciences  People  Learn about collective entities, ethnic groups, and nations.
People  Philosophy  Dive deep into fundamental questions about existence, knowledge, values, and more.
Philosophy  Reference works  Access comprehensive information collections compiled for easy retrieval.
Reference works  Third-party classification systems  Refer to various third-party classification systems linked to Wikipedia articles.
Library of Congress Classification  List of Dewey Decimal classes  Figurative system of human knowledge ( Encyclopédie )  Propædia ( Encyclopædia Britannica )  Tree of knowledge system  Universal Decimal Classification  Bibliographies  Access sources on specific topics for further reading or verification.
Wikipedia:List of bibliographies – Compilation of bibliographies  Category:Wikipedia bibliographies – Multi-page catalog of Wikipedia's bibliographies  Religion  Explore social-cultural systems, beliefs, ethics, and more.
Religion  Society and social sciences  Understand collectives, social interactions, political authority, and cultural norms.
Society  Technology and applied sciences  Learn about techniques, skills, methods, and processes in technology and science.
Technology  Wikipedia's main content systems  Overview articles  Get summaries of broad topics with links to subtopics, biographies, and related articles.
Overview articles  Outline pages  Explore topics in outline format, linking to more detailed articles.
Outline pages  List pages  Find enumerations of specific types, such as lists of countries and people.
List pages  Portals  Access featured articles, images, news, and more through thematic portals.
Portals  Glossaries  Access lists of terms with definitions through alphabetical glossaries.
Glossaries  Category system  Browse Wikipedia's category pages, which index articles by subject.
Category:Main topic classifications – Arts, History, Technology, and more  Wikipedia:Contents/Categories – Hand-crafted list of topic categories  Category:People – Biographies  Articles by importance or quality  Vital articles  Explore subjects that demand high-quality articles, grouped by importance.
Level 1 – 10 most important articles  Level 2 – 100 most important articles  Level 3 – 1,000 most important articles  Level 4 – 10,000 most important articles  Level 5 – 50,000 most important articles  Featured content  Discover Wikipedia's best, reviewed and vetted for quality.
Featured articles  Featured lists  Featured pictures  Featured topics  Good articles  Explore well-written, factually accurate articles that meet editorial standards.
Good articles  Spoken articles  Listen to Wikipedia articles as spoken word recordings.
Category:Spoken articles  Wikipedia:Spoken articles  Alphabetical lists of articles  Browse Wikipedia's articles alphabetically.
Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software .
Learn how to update the maintenance information here .
Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events  Edit instructions   Wikimedia portal    Worldwide current events  Sports events  Recent deaths  Entry views by week list   Wikimedia portal   Topics in the news   Børsen in 2010   The historic Børsen  (pictured) in Copenhagen , Denmark, catches fire.
Ongoing :  Israel–Hamas war  Myanmar civil war  Red Sea crisis  Russian invasion of Ukraine  timeline  War in Sudan  timeline  Recent deaths :  Carl Erskine  Derek Underwood  Fritz Peterson  Beverly LaHaye  Anna-Greta Leijon  Trina Robbins   Nominate an article         April 17, 2024 ( 2024-04-17 ) (Wednesday)   edit history watch     Armed conflicts and attacks   Russian invasion of Ukraine  Chernihiv strikes  At least 17 people are killed and 60 injured in a Russian missile strike, which hit an eight-storey building in a densely populated area in Chernihiv .
(BBC News)  (Reuters)  Business and economy   Vietnam mounts a $24 billion rescue for the Sai Gon Joint Stock Commercial Bank , which is currently involved in a massive fraud case.
(Reuters)  Disasters and accidents   2024 Persian Gulf floods  Dubai suffers flooding as it is hit with the heaviest rainfall in 75 years; at least one person dies.
( The Guardian )  (Reuters)  Hundreds of people are evacuated after the Ruang volcano erupts in North Sulawesi , Indonesia .
(Reuters)  Politics and elections   2024 Croatian parliamentary election  Voters go to the polls to elect members to the Sabor .
(The Guardian)  Science and technology   Scientists find in the Westbury Formation  fossil remains of the Ichthyotitan , the largest marine reptile ever.
(NOS)       April 16, 2024 ( 2024-04-16 ) (Tuesday)   edit history watch     Armed conflicts and attacks   Israeli–Palestinian conflict  Israel–Hamas war  Israel–Hezbollah conflict  The Israeli military assassinates Ismail Yusuf Baz, the commander of Hezbollah 's coastal sector in Lebanon , in an airstrike.
(Israel Defense Forces)  (Middle East Monitor)  Killing of Benjamin Achimeir  A mob of Israeli settlers in Aqraba kills two Palestinians in revenge for the killing of Israeli teenager Benjamin Achimeir amid escalating ethnoreligious violence in the West Bank .
( The Guardian )  2024 Wakeley church stabbing  Australian police say that the stabbing attack at an Assyrian church in Sydney was an Islamic terrorist act.
(Reuters)  Naxalite–Maoist insurgency  Indian security forces kill at least 29 Maoist insurgents in a major counterinsurgency operation in Kanker district , Chhattisgarh .
A large quantity of weapons are also seized.
(NDTV)  Peacekeeping operations in Nagorno-Karabakh  Russian  peacekeepers begin withdrawing from Nagorno-Karabakh , leaving the region under the full control of Azerbaijan .
(Caliber.az)  Russian invasion of Ukraine  Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy signs a new army draft law.
(Reuters)  Business and economy   2023–2024 video game industry layoffs  American video game company Take-Two Interactive lays off 5% of its workforce.
(Reuters)  Argentina and Denmark sign a 2.1 billion kroner (US$300 million) deal for the sale of 24 Royal Danish Air Force  F-16 Fighting Falcons to Argentina.
(AP)  Disasters and accidents   2024 Børsen fire  A fire occurs in Copenhagen 's 17th-century Stock Exchange Building , leading to the collapse of the building's iconic Dragespir spire.
Important Danish artworks including From Copenhagen Stock Exchange are safely removed from the building.
(Reuters)  ( The Guardian )  2024 Persian Gulf floods  Heavy rains and flash floods affect parts of the Persian Gulf , killing at least 18 people in Oman and causing travel disruptions in the United Arab Emirates .
(Al Jazeera)  Politics and elections   Impeachment of Alejandro Mayorkas  The U.S. House of Representatives sends impeachment articles for Homeland Security Secretary  Alejandro Mayorkas to the Senate .
(Reuters)  Police in Brussels , Belgium , shut down the right-wing  National Conservatism Conference which was expected to be hosted by Hungarian Prime Minister  Viktor Orbán .
(Politico)  Science and technology   European Space Agency scientists announce the discovery of Gaia BH3 , the second-largest known black hole in the Milky Way .
(NOS)  (ESA)  Sports   World Athletics announces that they will investigate the results of Sunday's Beijing  half marathon to determine if Chinese marathon record holder  He Jie won because of match fixing .
(NOS)  (Reuters)     April 15, 2024 ( 2024-04-15 ) (Monday)   edit history watch     Armed conflicts and attacks   Iran–Israel proxy conflict  2024 Iran–Israel conflict  2024 Iranian strikes in Israel , Iran–Japan relations  Japan increases its four-stage danger ranking level for most of Iran , including Tehran , to Level 3, which urges Japanese citizens to avoid all travel to Iran.
( The Japan News )  War in Sudan  Battle of El Fasher  At least nine civilians are killed and sixty others are injured in a renewed offensive by the Rapid Support Forces on the city of El Fasher .
(Sudan War Monitor)  Humanitarian impact of the war in Sudan  Donors pledge more than 2 billion euros for humanitarian aid in Sudan .
(Reuters)  Siege of El Obeid  Five civilians are killed and ten others are injured in crossfire between the Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support Forces in the city of El Obeid .
(Sudan War Monitor)  The Rapid Support Forces capture Mellit , North Darfur .
(Sudan War Monitor)  The Joint Darfur Force declares war on the Rapid Support Forces and allies with the Sudanese Armed Forces.
(Sudan War Monitor)  Clashes occur in Al-Madina Arab, Gezira State , between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces.
(Radio Tamazuj)  Business and economy   Tesla CEO Elon Musk announces that more than 10% of the company's global workforce will be laid off.
(CNBC)  (Reuters)  Lockheed Martin wins a $17 billion defense contract from the U.S. government to develop anti-ballistic missiles .
(Reuters)  Disasters and accidents   Fifty-eight people have been killed in Tanzania and 13 people have been killed in Kenya in the past two weeks by flooding caused by torrential rains, with more than 125,000 people in coastal areas of East Africa affected by the flooding.
Tanzania announces plans to construct fourteen dams in an attempt to reduce the damage from future floods.
(AP)  Lightning and heavy rains have killed at least 49 people across Pakistan in the past three days, mainly farmers in the eastern Punjab province .
(AP)  The death toll from landslides caused by torrential rain in Tana Toraja , South Sulawesi , Indonesia , increases to 20, after the last missing people are found dead.
(AP)  A magnitude 6.5 earthquake strikes West New Britain Province , Papua New Guinea .
No damage or casualties are reported.
(ABC News)  International relations   Sudan–United Kingdom relations , War in Sudan  The United Kingdom sanctions Alkhaleej Bank and Al-Fakher Advanced Works, two companies financing the Rapid Support Forces , and Red Rock Mining, which finances the Sudanese Armed Forces .
(Radio Tamazuj)  Law and crime   2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations  Former Australian political staffer Bruce Lehrmann loses his defamation case against Network 10 and journalist Lisa Wilkinson for broadcasting an interview with Lehrmann's former coworker Brittany Higgins in which she claimed that Lehrmann raped her.
( The Guardian )  2024 Wakeley church stabbing  Four people are injured, including bishop  Mar Mari Emmanuel , in a mass stabbing at a church in Sydney , Australia .
The perpetrator is arrested.
A mob clashes with police outside the church while trying to attack the detained suspect.
(Sky News Australia)  Politics and elections   Israel–Hamas war protests  Tax Day protests  Pro-Palestinian protests in the United States stop traffic on the Golden Gate Bridge and disrupt traffic to Seattle–Tacoma International Airport .
(Washington Post)  Lee Hsien Loong announces that he will resign as Prime Minister of Singapore on May 15 and will be succeeded by Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister  Lawrence Wong .
(CNA)  Thousands of people protest against a controversial foreign agent law in Tbilisi , Georgia .
Georgia's Interior Ministry reports at least 14 people have been detained.
Georgian Dream parliamentary leader Mamuka Mdinaradze is punched during a debate in parliament by a member of the opposition.
(DW)     April 14, 2024 ( 2024-04-14 ) (Sunday)   edit history watch     Disasters and accidents   2024 Dibaya Lubwe landslide  At least 15 people are killed and 60 more are missing during a landslide in Idiofa , Democratic Republic of the Congo .
(AP)  Heavy floods in Afghanistan have killed at least 33 people and injured 27 others in three days.
About 600 houses were either damaged or destroyed, and around 200 livestock died.
The floods also damaged around 800 hectares of agricultural land , and more than 85 kilometers (53 miles) of roads .
(AP)  International relations   Cyprus suspends Syrian asylum applications as there are increasing numbers of refugees.
(Reuters)  Law and crime   Three people are injured, one critically, in a shooting at Kuala Lumpur International Airport in Malaysia .
The perpetrator targeted his wife, who was not injured.
(CNA)  Sports   2023–24 Bundesliga  In association football , Bayer 04 Leverkusen win their first Bundesliga title.
(ABC News)  2024 Masters Tournament  American  professional golfer  Scottie Scheffler wins the Masters Tournament at the Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia .
This win is Scheffler's second win at the tournament.
(CNN)     April 13, 2024 ( 2024-04-13 ) (Saturday)   edit history watch     Armed conflicts and attacks   Iran–Israel proxy conflict  2024 Iran–Israel conflict  2024 Iranian strikes in Israel  Iran launches retaliatory airstikes at Israeli military bases from Iran, Iraq , Syria , southern Lebanon , and Yemen .
(ABC News)  U.S. naval ships mobilize to the Middle East to support Israel against incoming airstrikes .
( The Wall Street Journal )  (News.com.au)  Iranian seizure of the MSC Aries  Iran seizes the MSC Aries , a Portuguese-registered , Madeira-flagged  container ship owned by Zodiac Maritime which is chaired by Israeli billionaire Eyal Ofer .
(Reuters)  (Firstpost)  Israeli bombing of the Iranian embassy in Damascus  The Netherlands announces that their embassy in Tehran will close on Sunday.
(Al Arabiya)  Killing of Benjamin Achimeir  Israeli settlers attack Palestinians in the West Bank after missing Jewish teenager Benjamin Achimeir is found dead.
(BBC News)  Insurgency in Balochistan  Gunmen abduct and kill nine people from a bus in Nushki District , Balochistan , Pakistan .
All victims, whose bodies were found under a bridge, appear to have been shot at close range.
(Reuters)  Russian invasion of Ukraine  The Russian  Ministry of Defence claims that the village of Pervomaiske near Donetsk has been captured by Russian troops .
( Barron's )  War in Sudan  An offensive by the Rapid Support Forces begins in El Fasher .
(Sudan Tribune)  Disasters and accidents   Eighteen people are killed, two are injured and some are missing after landslides hit South Sulawesi , Indonesia .
(The Star)  Law and crime   2024 Bondi Junction stabbings  Six people are killed and seven others are injured in a mass stabbing at a shopping center in Sydney , Australia .
The perpetrator is shot and killed by police.
( The Guardian )  ( The Sydney Morning Herald )  Politics and elections   2024 Cook by-election  Simon Kennedy of the Liberal Party of Australia wins the by-election in the seat of Cook , succeeding former Prime Minister Scott Morrison .
(ABC News Australia)     April 12, 2024 ( 2024-04-12 ) (Friday)   edit history watch     Armed conflicts and attacks   Russian invasion of Ukraine  Russian strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure  Russia launches drone strikes across Ukraine .
Critical infrastructure is damaged in Kherson Oblast and a fire occurs at the Dnieper Hydroelectric Station in Zaporizhzhia causing around half a tonne of oil products to leak into the Dnieper river.
(Reuters)  (Ukrainska Pravda)  War in Sudan  Humanitarian impact of the war in Sudan  Canada pledges $132.2 million dollars to Sudan to help people affected by the country's ongoing humanitarian crisis .
(Global News)  Alliance of Sahel States  Nigerien crisis  Dozens of Russian military instructors arrive in Niger as part of an agreement with the ruling military junta to a install state-of-the-art air defence system.
(BBC News)  Israel–Hezbollah conflict  Hezbollah  forces launch dozens of airstrikes into northern Israel .
The militant group says that the airstrike barrage targeted IDF  artillery positions.
No casualties are reported.
(Al Arabiya)  War in Amhara  Two Fano militants are killed and a third is arrested during a shootout with police near the Millennium Hall in Addis Ababa , Ethiopia .
A civilian is also killed and two officers are wounded.
( The Washington Post )  Business and economy   Economic impact of the Israel–Hamas war , Egypt–European Union relations  The European Union pledges €1 billion in short-term financial aid to Egypt to help stabilise the country's economy.
(Reuters)  International relations   Iran–Israel proxy conflict  Israeli bombing of the Iranian embassy in Damascus  It is reported that Israel is preparing for a direct retaliatory strike from Iran on southern or northern Israel as soon as the next 24 to 48 hours.
A person briefed by the Iranian leadership says that while plans to strike are being discussed, no final decision has been made.
( The Wall Street Journal )  The United States restricts travel for its embassy personnel in Israel amid fears of a retaliation by Iran.
(BBC News)  The British government advises against all travel to Israel and the Palestinian territories due to the imminent possibility of an Iranian strike.
(Middle East Monitor)  France advises its citizens against traveling to Iran, Lebanon , Israel Palestine due to the risk of military escalation.
(CNN)  Germany tells its citizens to leave Iran immediately, saying that "air, land and sea transport routes" will likely be affected by military action in the region.
(Reuters)  Law and crime   Censorship in Mali  The military junta in Mali prohibits all forms of media from reporting on activities of political parties and associations.
(NOS)  Pakistan designates the Iranian  Quds Force  Liwa Zainebiyoun as a terrorist organization.
(VOA)  Science and technology   Russia successfully test-launches an intercontinental ballistic missile from the Kapustin Yar launch complex in Astrakhan Oblast .
(Reuters)     April 11, 2024 ( 2024-04-11 ) (Thursday)   edit history watch     Armed conflicts and attacks   Russian invasion of Ukraine  Mykolaiv strikes  At least four people are killed and five others are injured in a Russian missile strike in Mykolaiv .
(Reuters)  Russian strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure  Russia launches missile and drone strikes across Ukraine , damaging power facilities and causing widespread power outages for about 200,000 people.
Ukraine says that the Trypilska thermal power plant in Kyiv Oblast was destroyed in an overnight attack.
(Reuters)  (Bloomberg)  Iran–Israel proxy conflict  Israeli bombing of the Iranian embassy in Damascus  Russia warns its citizens against travelling to the Middle East amid increasing tensions between Iran and Israel .
(CNBC)  U.S. President  Joe Biden warns that Iran is threatening to launch a significant attack against Israel and promises "ironclad U.S. support" for Israel in the event of an attack.
(BBC News)  Myanmar civil war  The Karen National Union , local PDF groups, and other Karenni organizations seize the town of Myawaddy , Kayin State , from the Tatmadaw after three days of fighting.
Junta planes subsequently bomb the town, causing more than 1,000 locals to flee into neighbouring Thailand .
(CNN)  (Radio Free Asia)  Arts and culture   Archaeologists announce the discovery of new frescos at the ancient Roman city of Pompeii , depicting mythological ancient Greek figures.
(BBC News)  Disasters and accidents   2024 Lake Suviana explosion  A search operation at a power plant on Lake Suviana , near Bologna , Italy , has recovered the bodies of three workers who were missing after an explosion two days ago.
This brings the confirmed death toll to six.
A seventh worker is still missing, while the five injured are still in critical conditions.
(Il Resto del Carlino)  A Robinson R22 helicopter owned by the Philippine Air Force crashes near a public market in Cavite City , Philippines , killing both pilots.
(AFP via Barron's )  Law and crime   Capital punishment in Vietnam  A court in Vietnam sentences tycoon Trương Mỹ Lan to death for embezzling $12.46 billion from the Sai Gon Joint Stock Commercial Bank .
(DW)  Thirty-eight prisoners escape from a prison in Moroni , Comoros .
(Reuters)  Politics and elections   2024 South Korean legislative election  South Korean prime minister  Han Duck-soo and all senior advisers to President  Yoon Suk Yeol resign en masse in response to the results of yesterday's parliamentary elections.
(ABC News)  The Netherlands increases its military budget to 2 percent of its GDP for the first time since 1994.
( Algemeen Dagblad )  More April 2024 events...
    Time : 20:35 UTC | Day : 17 April    ◀ April 2024 ▶ S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More April 2024 events...
 Wikimedia portal   About this page  Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia    Ongoing events   Disasters  Gaza humanitarian crisis  H5N1 outbreak  Haitian crisis  Iceland volcanic eruptions  Sudanese refugee crisis  United States opioid epidemic  Economics  Argentine monetary crisis  Chinese property sector crisis  South African energy crisis  Sri Lankan economic crisis  Turkish economic crisis  United Kingdom cost-of-living crisis  Video game industry layoffs  Politics  Nigerien crisis  South China Sea territorial disputes  Texas border and immigration enforcement efforts  United States presidential impeachment efforts  Protests and strikes  Cuban protests  Israel–Hamas war protests  United Kingdom industrial disputes and strikes  edit section     Elections and referendums   Recent  April  0 2: Pakistan , Senate (indirect)  0 4: Belarus , Council of the Republic (indirect)  0 4: Kuwait , National Assembly  0 6: Slovakia , President (2nd round)  10: South Korea , National Assembly  Upcoming  17: Croatia , Parliament  17: Solomon Islands , National Parliament  19: India , Lok Sabha (1st phase)  21: DR Congo , Senate (indirect)  21: Ecuador , Constitutional referendum  21: Maldives , People's Majlis  24: North Macedonia , President  26: India , Lok Sabha (2nd phase)  29: Togo , National Assembly  edit section     Trials   Recently concluded  United States: 0 Juan Orlando Hernández  Vietnam: 0 Trương Mỹ Lan  Ongoing  Hong Kong: 0 Jimmy Lai  Israel: 0 Benjamin Netanyahu  Kosovo: 0 Specialist Chambers  Sudan: 0 Omar al-Bashir  Sweden: 0 Mohammed Hamo  United States: 0 Donald Trump (NY)  ICC: 0 Ali Kushayb  Upcoming  United States: 0 Bob Menendez  edit section     Sports   Association football  2023–24 UEFA Champions League  2023–24 UEFA Europa League  2023–24 UEFA Europa Conference League  2024 Copa Libertadores  2024 Copa Sudamericana  2024 CONCACAF Champions Cup  2023–24 Premier League  2023–24 La Liga  2023–24 Serie A  2023–24 Bundesliga  2023–24 Ligue 1  2024 Major League Soccer season  2023–24 Women's Super League  Baseball  2024 MLB season  Basketball  2023–24 NBA season  International cricket  2023–25 ICC World Test Championship  2024 IPL season  Golf  2024 PGA Tour  2024 European Tour  2024 LPGA Tour  Ice hockey  2023–24 NHL season  2023–24 PWHL season  Motorsport  2024 Formula One World Championship  2024 MotoGP World Championship  2024 NASCAR Cup Series  2024 IndyCar Series  Rugby union  2023–24 United Rugby Championship  Tennis  2024 ATP Tour  2024 WTA Tour  Other sports seasons  2023–24 curling season  2023–24 snooker season  More details – current sports events  edit section     Recent deaths   April   16: Carl Erskine  15: Whitey Herzog  15: Josip Manolić  14: Ken Holtzman  13: Faith Ringgold  12: Roberto Cavalli  12: Eleanor Coppola  12: Robert MacNeil  11: Fritz Peterson  11: Akebono Tarō  11: Park Bo-ram  10: Mister Cee  10: Trina Robbins  10: O.
J.
Simpson  0 8: Peter Higgs  0 8: Ralph Puckett  0 7: Jerry Grote  0 7: Joe Kinnear  0 5: C.
J.
Snare  0 4: Lynne Reid Banks  0 4: Thomas Gumbleton  0 4: Pat Zachry  0 3: Albert Heath  0 3: Gaetano Pesce  0 2: Christopher Durang  0 2: John Barth  0 2: Juan Vicente Pérez  0 2: Maryse Condé  0 2: John Sinclair  0 2: Larry Lucchino  0 1: Joe Flaherty  0 1: Sami Michael  0 1: Ed Piskor  0 1: Lou Conter  0 1: Vontae Davis  0 1: Mohammad Reza Zahedi   March   31: Barbara Rush  30: Chance Perdomo  30: Mark Spiro  30: Les Twentyman  29: Gerry Conway  29: Louis Gossett Jr.  28: Larry Lloyd  27: Joe Lieberman  27: Daniel Kahneman  26: Richard Serra  25: Paula Weinstein  24: George Abbey  24: Péter Eötvös  24: Imogen Stuart  23: Peter Angelos  23: Linda Bean  23: Brigitte García  23: Eli Noyes  23: Maurizio Pollini  22: Laurent de Brunhoff  21: Markus Jooste  21: Frédéric Mitterrand  20: Vernor Vinge  19: M.
Emmet Walsh   edit section     Ongoing conflicts   Global  War against ISIL  Africa  Cameroon  Anglophone Crisis  Central African Republic  Civil war  Democratic Republic of the Congo  Kivu conflict  Ethiopia  Amhara conflict  Mozambique  Insurgency in Cabo Delgado  Nigeria  Boko Haram insurgency  Sahel insurgency   Mali War  Burkina Faso  Niger   Somalia  Civil war  Sudan  Civil war  Americas  Colombia  Colombian conflict  Ecuador  Ecuadorian conflict  Mexico  Mexican drug war  Asia−Pacific  Afghanistan  Islamic State–Taliban conflict  Republican insurgency  India  Naxalite–Maoist insurgency  Indonesia  Papua conflict  Myanmar  Civil war  Pakistan  Insurgency in Balochistan  Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  Philippines  NPA rebellion  Europe  Russia and Ukraine  Russian invasion of Ukraine  Middle East  Iraqi conflict  Islamic State insurgency  Israel–Hamas war  Regional spillover  Israel–Hezbollah conflict  Red Sea crisis  Syrian civil war  Iran–Israel conflict  Turkish intervention  U.S.−led intervention  Turkey  PKK insurgency  Yemeni civil war  Saudi−led intervention  See also – List of ongoing proxy wars  edit section        2024 events and developments by topic      Arts   Animation ( Anime ) Architecture Comics Film ( Horror , Science fiction ) Literature ( Poetry ) Music ( Classical , Country , Hip hop , Jazz , Latin , Metal , Rock , UK , US , Korea ) Radio Television ( Australia , Canada , Ireland , UK , Scotland , US ) Video games   Politics and government   Elections International leaders Sovereign states Sovereign state leaders Territorial governors   Science and technology   Archaeology Biotechnology Computing Palaeontology Quantum computing and communication Senescence research Space/Astronomy Spaceflight Sustainable energy research   Environment   Climate change Weather ( Heat waves Tornadoes Wildfires )   Transportation   Aviation Rail transport Transportation technology    By place     Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh The Bahamas Bahrain Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Comoros Congo DR Congo Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Eswatini Equatorial Guinea Fiji Finland France Gabon The Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Liechtenstein Libya Lithuania Luxembourg Macau Madagascar Marshall Islands Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Nauru Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Somalia South Africa Solomon Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe    Establishments and disestablishments categories   Establishments Disestablishments   Works and introductions categories   Works Introductions Works entering the public domain     Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2024 .
...more   edit section      v t e Current events by month 2024  January  February  March  April  2023  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2022  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2021  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2020  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2019  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2018  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2017  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2016  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2015  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2014  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2013  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2012  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2011  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2010  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2009  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2008  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2007  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2006  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2005  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2004  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2003  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December  2002  January  February  March  April  May  June  July  August  September  October  November  December   Portal:Current events  Calendars    Discover Wikipedia using portals      List of all portals     The arts portal     Biography portal     Current events portal     Geography portal     History portal     Mathematics portal     Science portal     Society portal     Technology portal     Random portal     WikiProject Portals            Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1159745788 "Indian science and environment magazine  This article needs additional citations for verification .
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources .
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources:  "Down to Earth" magazine – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )    Down to Earth Logo Editor Sunita Narain Categories Environment , science , nature Frequency Fortnightly Circulation 70,000 copies (2017)  First issue May 1992  Company Centre for Science and Environment Country India Based in New Delhi Language English, Hindi Website www .downtoearth .org .in  Down to Earth is a fortnightly magazine focused on politics of environment and development, published in New Delhi, India.
The Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) assists in the production of the magazine.
About  It was started in 1992 by environmentalist Anil Agarwal , with a commitment to make people aware of the challenges of environment and development and to create informed change agents.
Indian environmentalist Sunita Narain , director general at CSE, is the current editor.
The fortnightly format was created specifically to supplement the research, analyses and documentation efforts of CSE, also founded by Anil Agarwal in 1980.
The objective / founding principles of the magazine, as envisioned in the first editorial, was to "fill a critical information gap’ rather than ‘capture a share of the information market".
Reportage and analysis is geared to enable an increasingly young India with information and analysis from villages, fields, factories and labs, places where the mainstream media has vacated.
In October 2016, Down To Earth launched a Hindi edition of the magazine, with exclusive coverage as well as repurposed content from DTE English edition.
The Hindi edition was launched to serve a long-standing need to serve the large Hindi-speaking audiences in the country, especially in the Hindi speaking heartland, and to begin a conversation on environment, development and sustainability concerns with them.
Divisions and initiatives  Down To Earth Books is the magazine's publishing wing.
It brings out two annuals: State of India's Environment and State of India's Environment In Figures, the country's only annual survey on the environment.
The latter one is a completely data-driven annual statement on the state of India's environment published every World Environment Day .
The Young Environmentalist is a Down to Earth and Gobar Times initiative to promote environmental awareness among the young and curious.
Recognition  The magazine was awarded the Ozone Award for its reportage in 2017,   and its writers have won many national and international fellowships.
It won the Greenaccord International Media Award in 2013.
References    ^ a  b  "Down to Earth celebrates 25 years with Hindi launch -" .
indianprinterpublisher.com (Indian Printer & Publisher) .
22 May 2017.
Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 .
Retrieved 24 November 2021 .
^  "About Us" .
Archived from the original on 6 March 2023 .
Retrieved 28 July 2016 .
^  "The Young Environmentalist" .
young.downtoearth.org.in .
Retrieved 18 October 2021 .
^  "Ozon Awards Recipients 2017"  (PDF) .
Montreal Protocol .
Archived from the original  (PDF) on 5 February 2020 .
Retrieved 25 March 2020 .
^  Chakraborty, Ajanta (25 November 2017).
"International Civil Aviation Organization: World Ozone Awards for CSE" .
The Times of India .
Archived from the original on 26 November 2017 .
^  "MSF Media Fellowship 2016" .
Médecins Sans Frontières(MSF)/Doctors Without Borders .
^  Lakshman, Nikhil (22 March 2019).
"An Editor Like None Other" .
Rediff .
Archived from the original on 22 March 2019 .
External links  Official website  Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Down_to_Earth_(magazine)&oldid=1206611185 "Introduction to English language Wikipedia  Shortcuts WP:ABT WP:ABOUT WP:WIKIPEDIA  This is a general introduction for visitors to Wikipedia.
For aspiring contributors, also see this guide and tutorial .
For other uses, see Wikipedia:Wikipedia (disambiguation) .
"Imagine a world in which every single person on the planet is given free access to the sum of all human knowledge.
That's what we're doing."
— Jimmy Wales    Wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia that anyone can edit, and millions already have .
Wikipedia's purpose is to benefit readers by presenting information on all branches of knowledge .
Hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , it consists of freely editable content, whose articles also have numerous links to guide readers towards more information.
Written collaboratively by largely anonymous volunteers known as Wikipedians , Wikipedia articles can be edited by anyone with Internet access (and who is not presently blocked ), except in limited cases where editing is restricted to prevent disruption or vandalism .
Since its creation on January 15, 2001 , it has grown into the world's largest reference website , attracting over a billion visitors monthly .
Wikipedia currently has more than sixty-two million articles in more than 300 languages , including 6,813,365 articles in English , with 123,552 active contributors in the past month.
Wikipedia's fundamental principles are summarized in its five pillars .
The Wikipedia community has developed many policies and guidelines , although editors do not need to be familiar with them before contributing.
Anyone can edit Wikipedia's text, references, and images.
What is written is more important than who writes it.
The content must conform with Wikipedia's policies , including being verifiable by published sources .
Editors' opinions , beliefs, personal experiences, unreviewed research , libelous material, and copyright violations will not remain.
Wikipedia's software allows easy reversal of errors, and experienced editors watch and patrol bad edits.
Wikipedia differs from printed references in important ways .
It is continually created and updated, and encyclopedic articles on new events appear within minutes rather than months or years.
Because anyone can improve Wikipedia, it has become more comprehensive than any other encyclopedia.
Its contributors enhance its articles' quality and quantity, and remove misinformation, errors and vandalism .
Any reader can fix a mistake or add more information to what has already been written (see Researching with Wikipedia ).
Begin by simply clicking the Edit or Edit source  buttons or the pencil icon  at the top of any non-protected page or section.
Wikipedia has tested the wisdom of the crowd since 2001 and found that it succeeds.
Article subjects Problems with articles about you, your company, or somebody you represent.
Licensing How to copy Wikipedia's information, donate your own, or report unlicensed use of your information.
Donors Find out about the process, how to donate, and information about how your money is spent.
Press and partnerships If you're a member of the press looking to contact Wikipedia, or have a business proposal for us.
Back to main page         Thank you for your interest in contacting Wikipedia.
Before proceeding, some important disclaimers:  Wikipedia has no central editorial board.
Contributions are made by a large number of volunteers at their own discretion.
Edits are neither the responsibility of the Wikimedia Foundation (the organisation that hosts the site) nor of its staff and edits will not generally be made in response to an email request.
Although Wikipedia was founded by Jimmy Wales , he is not personally responsible for our content.
If you have questions about the concept of Wikipedia rather than a specific problem, the About Wikipedia page may help.
If you disagree with an article's content, or are involved in a content dispute, see Dispute resolution .
The links on the left should direct you to how to contact us or resolve problems.
If you cannot find your issue listed there, you can email helpful, experienced volunteers at info-en wikimedia.org .
Please refrain from emailing about disagreements with content; they will not be resolved via email.
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Contact_us&oldid=967537943 "     Wikipedia is still not on the market  Thank you for considering a donation to the Wikimedia Foundation, the nonprofit that hosts Wikipedia and other crucial free knowledge projects.
We invite you to reflect on the number of times you visited Wikipedia in the past year.
If the knowledge you gained here was valuable, please join the 2% of readers who donate to the nonprofit that supports Wikipedia.
It is hard to know what to trust online these days.
Wikipedia is different: not perfect, but also not here to make a profit or to push a particular perspective.
It is written by everyone, together, because they want to help create a free repository of high-quality information.
If Wikipedia has given you useful knowledge this year, please give back.
There are no small contributions: every edit counts, every donation counts.
Thank you.
It appears that you do not have JavaScript enabled, or your browser does not support it.
In order to provide a safe, secure and pleasant experience, our donation form requires JavaScript.
Loading…  (If the form does not load, your web browser may not be supported.
Please try a different browser.)
Donation amount (EUR)      Just Once     Give Monthly         €2     €5     €10     €20       €30     €50     €100      Other      Please select an amount (minimum $1)  We cannot accept donations greater than USD $4 ($1 $2) through our website.
Please contact our major gifts staff at $3.
Donate by credit/debit card           PayPal       Apple Pay       Google Pay                        I'll generously add € X to cover the transaction fees so you can keep 100% of my donation.
Can we stay in touch?
Yes.
Send me emails with ways that I can support Wikipedia.
No.
Don't send me an occasional email with opportunities to support Wikipedia.
Sorry to hear that.
We don't email often; would you consider changing your mind?
Thanks for changing your mind!
We'll respect your inbox.
Please select an email option  The Wikimedia Foundation will send you email updates and tell you if Wikipedia needs your support or advice in the future.
Your information is handled in accordance with our donor privacy policy .
Each email you receive will include easy unsubscribe options.
Where your donation goes  Technology : Servers, bandwidth, maintenance, development.
Wikipedia is one of the top 10 websites in the world, and it runs on a fraction of what other top websites spend.
People and Projects : The other top websites have thousands of employees.
Wikimedia Foundation has about 700 staff and contractors to support a wide variety of projects, making your donation a great investment in a highly-efficient not-for-profit organization.
Tax deductibility information      We do not sell or trade your information to anyone.
By donating, you agree to share your personal information with the Wikimedia Foundation, the nonprofit organization that hosts Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects, and its service providers pursuant to our donor policy .
Wikimedia Foundation and its service providers are located in the United States and in other countries whose privacy laws may not be equivalent to your own.
For more information please read our donor policy .
For recurring donors, fixed monthly payments will be debited by the Wikimedia Foundation on the monthly anniversary of the first donation, until such time as you notify us to discontinue them.
Donations initiated on the 29, 30, or 31 of the month will recur on the last day of the month for shorter months, as close to the original date as possible.
Problems donating?
Other ways to give  Frequently asked questions              Almost done: Please, make it $Y monthly.
Monthly support is the best way to ensure that Wikipedia keeps thriving.
No thanks!
I'll make a one-time donation of $X  Yes, I'll donate $Y each month   Yes, I'll donate monthly, but for a different amount       Thank you for your support!
Enter your monthly donation amount     Please select an amount (minimum $1)  We cannot accept donations greater than USD $4 ($1 $2) through our website.
Donate monthly           Retrieved from " https://donate.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:LandingPage "Main page of the help namespace        This page provides help with the most common questions about Wikipedia .
You can also search Wikipedia's help pages using the search box below, or browse the Help menu or the Help directory .
For simple searches, there is a search box at the top of every page.
Type what you are looking for in the box.
Partial matches will appear in a dropdown list.
Select any page in the list to go to that page.
Or, select the magnifying glass "Go" button, or press ↵ Enter , to go to a full search result.
For advanced searches, see Help:Searching .
There are other ways to browse and explore Wikipedia articles; many can be found at Wikipedia:Contents .
See our disclaimer for cautions about Wikipedia's limitations.
For mobile access , press the mobile view link at the very bottom of every desktop view page.
Edit an article  Contributing is easy: see how to edit a page .
For a quick summary on participating, see contributing to Wikipedia , and for a friendly tutorial, see our introduction .
For a listing of introductions and tutorials by topic, see getting started .
The Simplified Manual of Style and Cheatsheet can remind you of basic wiki markup.
Be bold in improving articles!
When adding facts, please provide references so others may verify them.
If you are affiliated with the article subject, please see our conflict of interest guideline .
The simple guide to vandalism cleanup can help you undo malicious edits.
If you're looking for places you can help out, the Task Center is the place to go, or check out what else is happening at the community portal .
You can practice editing and experiment in a sandbox your sandbox .
Report a problem with an article  If there is a problem with an article about yourself, a family member, a friend or a colleague, please read Biographies of living persons/Help .
If you spot a problem with an article, you can fix it directly, by clicking on the "Edit" link at the top of that page.
See the "edit an article" section of this page for more information.
If you don't feel ready to fix the article yourself, post a message on the article's talk page .
This will bring the matter to the attention of others who work on that article.
There is a "Talk" link at the beginning of every article page.
You can contact us .
If it's an article about you or your organization, see Contact us – Subjects .
Create a new article or upload media  Check Your first article to see if your topic is appropriate, then the Article wizard will walk you through creating the article.
Once you have created an article, see Writing better articles for guidance on how to improve it and what to include (like reference citations ).
For contributing images, audio or video files, see the Introduction to uploading images .
Then the Upload wizard will guide you through that process.
Stuck?
Answers to common problems can be found at frequently asked questions .
Or check out where to ask questions or make comments .
New users should seek help at the Teahouse if they're having problems editing Wikipedia.
Volunteers will respond as soon as they're able.
Or ask for help on your talk page and a volunteer will visit you there!
You can get live help with editing in the help chatroom .
For help with technical issues, ask at the Village pump .
Factual questions  If searching Wikipedia has not answered your question ( for example, questions like "Which country has the world's largest fishing fleet?"
), try the Reference Desk .
Volunteers there will attempt to answer your questions on any topic, or point you toward the information you need.
Directories   Directory : main list of directories and indexes.
Help related  Help directory : for informative, instructional and consultation pages.
Request directory : for services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia.
Protocols and conventions  Policy directory : official policies for "English Wikipedia".
Guideline directory : official guidelines for "English Wikipedia".
Manual of Style directory : pages related to the style manual of Wikipedia articles.
Community related  Departments : for the different divisions of Wikipedia.
Editor's index : for everything an editor needs to know to work on Wikipedia.
Essay directory : for Wikipedia namespace essays.
Dashboard : for current discussions taking place throughout Wikipedia.
WikiProjects : for people who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia.
MediaWiki software  Wikitext : for the syntax used by Wikipedia to format a page.
HTML : for HTML5 elements, or tags and their attribute.
Templates : for templates used within Wikipedia.
Help by topic  Help Menu : for searching by subject matter.
Navigating Wikipedia : for searching and browsing the encyclopedia.
Joining Wikipedia : how to get involved.
Editing Wikipedia : has general help for editors.
Links and references : has help for creating links, or dealing with references  Images and media : how to use images, videos and sound files.
Keeping track of changes : how to track the evolution of a page, or follow a user.
Policies and guidelines : for community standards.
Asking questions : volunteers will attempt to answer.
The Wikipedia community : how to submit or debate a proposal.
Resources and lists : has resources for editors.
Account settings : has tips and tools for registered users.
Technical information : has tools for advanced users, and troubleshooting.
Site map : is the above thirteen pages on one single page.
Tip of the day  Where to upload images and media files  Wikipedia encyclopedia articles may be improved by including images as well as sound and video clip media files.
It is important to understand where to upload these files.
Images and other media files must be uploaded either to Wikipedia or to Wikimedia Commons before they can be used.
If you do not already have a Wikipedia account, you must create one to upload images.
The account will work across all twelve Wikipedia sister projects such as the Commons.
Wikipedia prefers free images that can be reused commercially and modified.
Non-free images may be used, but only in certain circumstances and if a free equivalent is not possible.
Wikimedia Commons only accepts free images, which can then be used by any of the other Wikimedia projects.
There is a how-to guide available at Wikipedia:Creation and usage of media files and a picture tutorial that explains how to add images to an article.
This page takes you through a set of tutorials aimed at complete newcomers interested in contributing.
It covers all the basics, and each tutorial takes only a few minutes, so you can become a proficient Wikipedian in no time!
Get started  Policies and Guidelines     The wiki markup source editor shows the underlying page source code.
It works like a plain text file, indicating links and other items using simple code like this: ] .
Editing  Referencing  Images  Tables      VisualEditor is the easier way of editing that works more like a word processor and hides the underlying source code.
Links and other items are edited using toolbar and pop-up interfaces.
Editing  Referencing  Images  Tables      Talk pages  Navigating Wikipedia Manual of Style Conclusion   View all as single page      ns12  ns4        Shortcuts WP:I H:I H:INTRO  For more training information, see also:  Full help contents page  Training for students  A single-page guide to contributing  A training adventure game  Resources for new editors   Please consider leaving us some feedback.
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Introduction&oldid=1218518073 "Collaborations, tasks and news about English Wikipedia    Community portal   Dashboard  Departments  Maintenance  Tasks  Discord  IRC  Meetups    Directories ( Policies/Guidelines  Essays  How-to  Index  Noticeboards  WikiProjects )    Welcome to the community portal!
Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM  This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia.
New to Wikipedia ?
See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started.
For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory .
Interact more  For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard .
( edit | history )   How to add to the community bulletin board      The community bulletin board has 2 sections that can be used by Wikipedians for announcements: "Events and projects" and "WikiProject notices".
In general, keep it concise (under 2 lines), refrain from fancy formatting , and new entries should be placed at the top of their section.
Before editing, make sure you are on Wikipedia:Community bulletin board , not Wikipedia:Community portal , where the board is transcluded.
Events and projects : In this section, only organized events, projects, and/or competitions should be listed.
These are organized by how often they occur: The Yearly section is for uncommon events, like events that only occur every year, once, or irregularly.
The Monthly section is for events that occur each month, or are always ongoing.
WikiProject notices : In this section, any announcement, request for help or other notice from a WikiProject should be listed here.
Entries should be signed, and ordered from newest to oldest.
Entries are to be removed after a period of 6 months .
Welcome to the community bulletin board , which is a page used for announcements from WikiProjects and other groups.
Included here are coordinated efforts, events, projects, and other general announcements.
Dashboard  News  Task Center  Goings-on  Meetups  In the media  Mailing lists      Events and projects  Yearly or infrequent events   WikiProject Louisville's Derby 150 article development and backlog drive .
Help WikiProject Louisville commemorate and celebrate the 150th Kentucky Derby by joining our article development and backlog drive taking place during the period of the Kentucky Derby Festival , April 20 – May 5, 2024.
The purpose of this drive is to improve a corner of the Wikipedia related to and timed for this special rare anniversary.
Monthly or continuous events   Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history .
The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them.
The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles.
The contest runs from the first to last day of each month.
Guild of Copy Editors' editing blitz.
The April 2024 editing blitz is a one-week-long effort by the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce its backlog.
The themes are: all articles on the GOCE Requests page , and articles on the January 2023 and February 2023 backlog.
It will begin on 14 April, 00:00 (UTC), and end on 20 April, 23:59 (UTC).
Wikipedia:WikiProject Women in Red 2023 Events : WP:WIR/EVENTS - updated monthly  The 100,000 Challenge .
The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries.
This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages.
Will be updated every week or two.
The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic.
It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute.
Meetups for April 2024  +/-   London 203  April 14, 2024 ( 2024-04-14 )    Oxford 99  April 21, 2024 ( 2024-04-21 )    San Diego 110  April 22, 2024 ( 2024-04-22 )    North Carolina Earth Day  April 23, 2024 ( 2024-04-23 )    Edinburgh 15  April 27, 2024 ( 2024-04-27 )    BLT Office Hours  April 28, 2024 ( 2024-04-28 )    Meetups for May 2024  +/-   Auckland 22  May 4, 2024 ( 2024-05-04 )    Leeds 6  May 4, 2024 ( 2024-05-04 )    London 204  May 12, 2024 ( 2024-05-12 )    US Mountain West online  May 14, 2024 ( 2024-05-14 )    San Diego 111  May 20, 2024 ( 2024-05-20 )    BLT Office Hours  May 26, 2024 ( 2024-05-26 )      WikiProject notices  Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at The Signpost' s WikiProject Report page.
Please include your signature when adding a listing here.
WikiProject Outlines news: Outline drafts nearing completion include: Draft:Outline of Delhi  Draft:Outline of George Washington  Draft:Outline of Jerusalem  The Outline of the week is Outline of jazz .
Please help improve them.
— The Transhumanist 10:15, 7 April 2024 (UTC)   WikiProject Vocaloid's proposal is seeking editors with interest in any Vocaloid related topic to join the project.
WikiProject Bendigo is currently seeking interested editors to join the project.
Lotsw73 ( talk ) 05:03, 30 January 2024 (UTC)   WikiProject Operating systems (in proposal state) is looking for interested participants to support the creation of a regular WikiProject page.
Revive WikiProject United States governors .
This WikiProject is dedicated to the leaders of the 50 U.S. states.
If you agree, post a message on the WikiProject talk page .
WikiProject AI Cleanup has recently been started to combat the addition of problematic AI-generated content.
Interested editors are encouraged to join!
ARandomName123 ( talk ) 01:35, 5 December 2023 (UTC)       Technical news  This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Tech news .
( edit | history )   Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community.
Please tell other users about these changes.
Not all changes will affect you.
Translations are available.
Problems   Between 2 April and 8 April, on wikis using Flagged Revisions , the "Reverted" tag was not applied to undone edits.
In addition, page moves, protections and imports were not autoreviewed.
This problem is now fixed.
Changes later this week   The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 April.
It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 April.
It will be on all wikis from 18 April ( calendar ).
Default category sort keys will now affect categories added by templates placed in footnotes .
Previously footnotes used the page title as the default sort key even if a different default sort key was specified (category-specific sort keys already worked).
A new variable page_last_edit_age will be added to abuse filters .
It tells how many seconds ago the last edit to a page was made.
Future changes   Volunteer developers are kindly asked to update the code of their tools and features to handle temporary accounts .
Learn more .
Four database fields will be removed from database replicas (including Quarry ).
This affects only the abuse_filter and abuse_filter_history tables.
Some queries might need to be updated.
Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe .
Requests for comment  Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment :  Biographies  Economy and trade  History and geography  Language and linguistics  Media, the arts, and architecture  Politics, government, and law  Religion and philosophy  Science and mathematics  Society, sports, and culture  Wikipedia policies and guidelines  Wikipedia style and naming  WikiProjects and collaborations  Wikipedia technical issues and templates  Wikipedia proposals  Unsorted    General notices        Centralized discussion    Village pumps  policy  tech  proposals  idea lab  WMF  misc     How to describe past events on the main page  Enforcing ECR for article creators  Link to Wikipedia:Contents from the main page  RfA 2024 review   WMF draft annual plan available for review  Questions for U4C candidates  Movement Charter draft review period   For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard .
This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try.
(See Wikipedia:Maintenance or the Task Center for further information.)
Fix spelling and grammar   Matthew 8:32  Cocomelon  Ehsaas Programme  Pedigree Petfoods and Heinz extortion campaign  Podagrion mantis  More...
• Learn how     Fix wikilinks   Religion and alcohol  TGIF (TV programming block)  Thomas Szasz  More...
• Learn how     Update with new information   Mauro Rizzo  Mansour Belhani  WaiBOP United  Central Bicol State University of Agriculture  The Silent League  More...
• Learn how     Expand short articles   Dennis Bright  Mohamed Lamin Kamara  Kemoh Fadika  Moijueh Kaikai  Hindowa Momoh  More...
• Learn how     Check and add references   Detribalization  Lincoln Chafee  Barnet Kellman  Stachybotrys chartarum  New World PCS  More...
• Learn how     Fix original research issues   Functional decomposition  Dory Chamoun  Shankill, Dublin  Citizen Smith  George Sale  More...
• Learn how     Improve lead sections   Nimmagadda Prasad  Intellectual disability and higher education in the United States  GNOME Foundation  Starlight (Marvel Comics)  Egyptian Green Party  More...
• Learn how     Add an image   Ipswich Town Wharves  Irrigation in Brazil  Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics  Interstate 465  Immigration to South Korea   More...
• Learn how     Translate and clean up   Talharpa  Manchinha case  Lucas Lira  Gabriela Pizarro  Yushaev Zamir  More...
• Learn how     Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women .
Help improve popular pages , especially those of low quality .
This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community portal/Open tasks .
( edit | history )    This week's article for improvement is: Antarctic  Previous selections: Fire safety  ·  Jean Gabin  ·  Abdalá Bucaram    This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Wikipedia requested audio of animals     Newest featured content    Articles   Cross Temple, Fangshan  1912 suspension of Ty Cobb  Tufted jay  Cora Agnes Benneson  1878 FA Cup final  The Dark Pictures Anthology: House of Ashes  The Overlook (Alexander McQueen collection)  Hanford Engineer Works  Anna Blackburne  Well he would, wouldn't he?
Capri-Sun  The Day Before the Revolution  Dorothy Olsen  Nicoll Highway collapse  Breakdown (Mariah Carey song)    Topics   Overview of Ben&Ben  Primates  30 (album)  Jupiter  Overview of Angeline Quinto  Meghan Trainor's Billboard Hot 100 entries  Overview of Kyla  Meghan Trainor albums  Overview of Angel Aquino  Takin' It Back  Animals in lagomorpha  Overview of Angel Locsin  Romanian record charts  Title (album)  Overview of Judy Ann Santos    Lists   World Heritage Sites in Zimbabwe  Games by Supermassive Games  Erinaceids  Cobra Kai episodes  Ireland women's cricket team record by opponent  James McAvoy performances  Hot R&B Singles number ones of 1990  Constituencies of the Mizoram Legislative Assembly  Snooker world rankings 1983/1984  Municipalities of Puebla  Roles and awards of Rachelle Ann Go  Green Bay Packers starting quarterbacks  FIFA Women's World Cup finals  Dallas Cowboys first-round draft picks  Seattle Storm seasons    Pictures   Clementines  Iberian lynx  Signing of the Paris Peace Accords  Oxybelis aeneus  Challenger 2 fires a practice round  Fraunhofer lines  Great Sphinx of Tanis  Wood stork  Victorious Youth  Aurora borealis  Ford Strikers Riot  Europa Clipper commemorative plate  James VI and I  Set design for Gustave III  Four Seasons in One Head      Tip of the day   Tip of the day...
  Are you jealous of others' user pages?
If you have seen some cool user pages and were wondering how to make yours the envy of all Wikipedians, check out the User page design center .
Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip  Read more: User page Hall of Fame   Wikipedia:User pages   Become a Wikipedia tipster  To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{ totd }}    Wikipedia:Community portal at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel guides from Wikivoyage Taxa from Wikispecies Data from Wikidata  v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines  (?)
Five pillars  Ignore all rules  Content (?)
P  Verifiability  No original research  Neutral point of view  What Wikipedia is not  Biographies of living persons  Copyright ( Copyright violations )  Image use  Article titles  G  Notability  Autobiography  Citing sources  Reliable sources  Medicine  Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources  Plagiarism  Don't create hoaxes  Fringe theories  Patent nonsense  External links  Conduct (?)
P  Civility  Consensus  Harassment  Vandalism  Ignore all rules  No personal attacks  Ownership of content  Edit warring  Dispute resolution  Sockpuppetry  No legal threats  Child protection  Paid-contribution disclosure  G  Assume good faith  Conflict of interest  Disruptive editing  Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point  Etiquette  Gaming the system  Please do not bite the newcomers  Courtesy vanishing  Responding to threats of harm  Talk page guidelines  Signatures  Deletion (?)
P  Deletion policy  Proposed deletion  Biographies  Criteria for speedy deletion  Attack page  Oversight  Revision deletion  Enforcement (?)
P  Administrators  Banning  Blocking  Page protection  Editing (?)
P  Editing policy  G  Article size  Summary style  Be bold  Disambiguation  Hatnotes  Broad-concept article  Understandability  Style  Manual of Style  Contents  Accessibility  Dates and numbers  Images  Layout  Lead section  Linking  Lists  Classification  Categories, lists, and navigation templates  Categorization  Template namespace  Project content (?)
G  Project namespace  WikiProjects  User pages  User boxes  Shortcuts  Subpages  WMF  (?)
P  Terms of Use  List of policies  Friendly space policy  Licensing and copyright  Privacy policy   List of all policies and guidelines  P : List of policies  G : List of guidelines  Summaries of values and principles   v t e Manual of Style  Overview  Directory  Tips  Content  Accessibility  Biography  Disambiguation pages  Organizing by subject area  Gender identity  Hidden text  Infoboxes  Linking  Self-references  Words to watch  Formatting  Abbreviations  Capitalization  Dates and numbers  Pronunciation  Spelling  Text formatting  Titles of works  Images  Captions  Image placement  Icons  Images  Layout  Layout  Lead section  Tables  Trivia sections  Lists  Lists  Lists of works  Road junctions  Stand-alone lists  Legal  Legal  Trademarks  Arts  Anime and manga  Comics  Blazons  Film  Lyrics and poetry  Novels  Philosophy  Television  Video games  Visual arts  Writing about fiction  Music  Music  Music samples  Record charts  Stringed instruments  Regional  Specific naming conventions  Canada  China (and Chinese)  France (and French)  Egypt  Hawaii  India  Indonesia  Ireland  Japan  Korea  Malaysia  Macedonia  Pakistan  Philippines  Poland  Singapore  Trinidad and Tobago  Religion  Islam  Latter Day Saints  Science  Mathematics  Medicine  Chemistry  Compound classes  Chemicals  References and external links  Safety  Structure drawing  Taxonomy  Sports  Cue sports  Snooker  Related  Article size  Article titles  Categories, lists, and navigation templates  Categorization  Citing sources  Contents  Hatnotes  Military history  Notability  Signatures  Overview  Subpages  Talk page guidelines  Template namespace  Tips  Understandability  User pages  Wikimedia sister projects  WikiProjects  Search    Category   v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users  Why create an account?
For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard .
General community topics  Administration  News  The Signpost  Goings-on  In the media  Meetups  Mailing lists  Wikipedians  Statistics  The Wikipedia Library  Centralized discussion  Village pump  Idea lab  Policy  Proposals  Technical  Miscellaneous  WMF  Holidays  Bots  Contents and grading  Requested articles  Most-wanted articles  Images needing articles  Articles needing images  Articles for creation  WP:AFC/R  WP:AFC/C  Creation  Help  Vital articles  Articles for improvement  Peer review  Good article nominations  Featured article candidates  Lists  Pictures  Topics  Article translation  Pages  Main Page  Errors  WikiProjects and collaborations  Directory  Culture and the arts  Geographical  History and society  Science, technology and engineering  Wikipedia assistance and tasks  Patrols  Recent changes  Counter-Vandalism Unit  Version 1.0 Editorial Team  Accessibility  Organizations category  Awards and feedback  Reward board  Contests  A nice cup of tea and a sit down  Charitableness  WikiLove  Compliment before criticism  Kindness Campaign  Thanks!
Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy  Article content  Articles must be written  All Five Pillars are equally important  Avoid vague introductions  Be a reliable source  Civil POV pushing  Cohesion  Competence is required  Concede lost arguments  Dissent is not disloyalty  Don't lie  Don't search for objections  Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country  Editors will sometimes be wrong  Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia  Explanationism  External criticism of Wikipedia  Here to build an encyclopedia  Leave it to the experienced  Levels of competence  Most ideas are bad  Need  Neutrality of sources  Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction  The one question  Oversimplification  Paradoxes  Paraphrasing  POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields  Process is important  Product, process, policy  Purpose  Reasonability rule  Systemic bias  There is no seniority  Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia  Tendentious editing  The role of policies in collaborative anarchy  The rules are principles  Trifecta  Wikipedia in brief  Wikipedia is an encyclopedia  Wikipedia is a community  Wikipedia is not RationalWiki  Article construction  100K featured articles  Abandoned stubs  Acronym overkill  Adding images improves the encyclopedia  Advanced article editing  Advanced text formatting  Akin's Laws of Article Writing  Alternatives to the "Expand" template  Amnesia test  A navbox on every page  An unfinished house is a real problem  Articles have a half-life  Autosizing images  Avoid mission statements  Be neutral in form  Beef up that first revision  Blind men and an elephant  BOLD, revert, discuss cycle  Build content to endure  Cherrypicking  Chesterton's fence  Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books  Citation overkill  Citation underkill  Common-style fallacy  Concept cloud  Creating controversial content  Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability  Deprecated sources  Dictionaries as sources  Don't demolish the house while it's still being built  Don't get hung up on minor details  Don't hope the house will build itself  Don't panic  Don't "teach the controversy"  Editing on mobile devices  Editors are not mindreaders  Encourage the newcomers  Endorsements (commercial)  Featured articles may have problems  Formatting bilateral relations articles  Formatting bilateral relations templates  Fruit of the poisonous tree  Give an article a chance  How to write a featured article  Identifying and using independent sources  History sources  Law sources  Primary sources  Science sources  Style guides  Tertiary sources  Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats  Inaccuracy  Introduction to structurism  Mine a source  Merge Test  Minors and persons judged incompetent  "Murder of" articles  Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography  Not everything needs a navbox  Not everything needs a template  Nothing is in stone  Obtain peer review comments  Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area  Permastub  Potential, not just current state  Presentism  Principle of Some Astonishment  The problem with elegant variation  Pro and con lists  Printability  Pruning article revisions  Publicists  Put a little effort into it  Restoring part of a reverted edit  Robotic editing  Sham consensus  Source your plot summaries  Specialized-style fallacy  Stub Makers  Run an edit-a-thon  Temporary versions of articles  Tertiary-source fallacy  There are no shortcuts to neutrality  There is no deadline  There is a deadline  The deadline is now  Try not to leave it a stub  Understanding Wikipedia's content standards  Walled garden  What an article should not include  Wikipedia is a work in progress  Wikipedia is not a reliable source  Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion  The world will not end tomorrow  Write the article first  Writing better articles  Writing article content  Avoid thread mode  Copyediting reception sections  Coup  Don't throw more litter onto the pile  Gender-neutral language  Myth vs fiction  Proseline  Use our own words  We shouldn't be able to figure out your opinions  Write the article first  Writing about women  Writing better articles  Removing or deleting content  Adjectives in your recommendations  AfD is not a war zone  Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions  Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews  Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions  Arguments to make in deletion discussions  Avoid repeated arguments  Before commenting in a deletion discussion  But there must be sources!
Confusing arguments mean nothing  Content removal  Counting and sorting are not original research  Delete or merge  Delete the junk  Deletion is not cleanup  Does deletion help?
Don't attack the nominator  Don't confuse stub status with non-notability  Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument  Follow the leader  How to save an article proposed for deletion  I just don't like it  Identifying blatant advertising  Identifying test edits  Immunity  Keep it concise  Liar liar pants on fire  Nothing  Nothing is clear  Overzealous deletion  Relisting can be abusive  Relist bias  The Heymann Standard  Unopposed AFD discussion  Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole  Why was the page I created deleted?
What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion  When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork  No Encyclopedic Use  Essays on civility The basics  Accepting other users  Apology  Contributing to complicated discussions  Divisiveness  Don't retaliate  Edit at your own pace  Encouraging the newcomers  Enjoy yourself  Expect no thanks  High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors  How to be civil  Maintaining a friendly space  Negotiation  Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors  Please say please  Relationships with academic editors  Thank you  Too long; didn't read  Truce  Unblock perspectives  We are all Wikipedians here  You have a right to remain silent  Philosophy  A weak personal attack is still wrong  Advice for hotheads  An uncivil environment is a poor environment  Be the glue  Beware of the tigers!
Civility warnings  Deletion as revenge  Failure  Forgive and forget  It's not the end of the world  Nobody cares  Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals  Old-fashioned Wikipedian values  Profanity, civility, and discussions  Revert notification opt-out  Shadowless Fists of Death!
Staying cool when the editing gets hot  The grey zone  The last word  There is no Divine Right of Editors  Most ideas are bad  Nothing is clear  Reader  The rules of polite discourse  There is no common sense  Two wrongs don't make a right  Wikipedia clichés  Wikipedia is not about winning  Wikipedia should not be a monopoly  Writing for the opponent  Dos  Assume good faith  Assume the assumption of good faith  Assume no clue  Avoid personal remarks  Avoid the word "vandal"  Be excellent to one another  Beyond civility  Call a spade a spade  Candor  Deny recognition  Desist  Discussing cruft  Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass  Encourage full discussions  Get over it  How to lose  Imagine others complexly  Just drop it  Keep it concise  Keep it down to earth  Mind your own business  Say "MOBY"  Mutual withdrawal  Read before commenting  Settle the process first  Don'ts  ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI  Civil POV pushing  Cyberbullying  Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack  Don't be a fanatic  Don't be a jerk  Don't be an ostrich  Don't be ashamed  Don't be a WikiBigot  Don't be high-maintenance  Don't be inconsiderate  Don't be obnoxious  Don't be prejudiced  Don't be rude  Don't be the Fun Police  Don't bludgeon the process  Don't call a spade a spade  Don't call people by their real name  Don't call the kettle black  Don't call things cruft  Don't come down like a ton of bricks  Don't cry COI  Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify  Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid  Don't eat the troll's food  Don't fight fire with fire  Don't give a fuck  Don't help too much  Don't ignore community consensus  Don't knit beside the guillotine  Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature  Don't remind others of past misdeeds  Don't shout  Don't spite your face  Don't take the bait  Don't template the regulars  Don't throw your toys out of the pram  Do not insult the vandals  Griefing  Nationalist editing  No angry mastodons  just madmen  No Nazis  No racists  No Confederates  No, you can't have a pony  Passive aggression  Please don't bite the newcomers  POV railroad  Superhatting  There are no oracles  There's no need to guess someone's preferred pronouns  You can't squeeze blood from a turnip  UPPERCASE  WikiRelations  WikiBullying  WikiCrime  WikiHarassment  WikiHate  WikiLawyering  WikiLove  WikiPeace  Essays on notability  Advanced source searching  All high schools can be notable  Alternative outlets  Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions  Articles with a single source  Avoid template creep  Bare notability  Big events make key participants notable  Businesses with a single location  But it's true!
Common sourcing mistakes  Clones  Coatrack  Discriminate vs indiscriminate information  Don't cite GNG  Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity  Every snowflake is unique  Existence ≠ Notability  Existence does not prove notability  Extracting the meaning of significant coverage  Google searches and numbers  High Schools  Inclusion is not an indicator of notability  Independent sources  Inherent notability  Insignificant  Masking the lack of notability  Make stubs  Minimum coverage  News coverage does not decrease notability  No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability  No big loss  No one cares about your garage band  No one really cares  Notability/Historical/Arguments  Notability cannot be purchased  Notability comparison test  Notability is not a level playing field  Notability is not a matter of opinion  Notability is not relevance or reliability  Notability means impact  Notability points  Notability sub-pages  Notabilitymandering  Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article  Obscurity ≠ Lack of notability  Offline sources  One hundred words  One sentence does not an article make  Other stuff exists  Overreliance upon Google  Perennial websites  Pokémon test  Read the source  Reducing consensus to an algorithm  Run-of-the-mill  Solutions are mixtures and nothing else  Subjective importance  Third-party sources  Trivial mentions  Video links  Vanispamcruftisement  What BLP1E is not  What is and is not routine coverage  What notability is not  What to include  Wikipedia is not Crunchbase  Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause  Wikipedia is not the place to post your résumé  Humorous essays  Adminitis  Akin's Laws of Article Writing  Alternatives to edit warring  ANI flu  Anti-Wikipedian  Anti-Wikipedianism  Articlecountitis  Asshole John rule  Assume bad faith  Assume faith  Assume good wraith  Assume stupidity  Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith  Avoid using preview button  Avoid using wikilinks  Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense  Barnstaritis  Before they were notable  BOLD, revert, revert, revert  Boston Tea Party  Butterfly effect  CaPiTaLiZaTiOn MuCh?
Complete bollocks  Counting forks  Counting juntas  Crap  Don't stuff beans up your nose  Don't-give-a-fuckism  Don't abbreviate "Wikipedia" as "Wiki"!
Don't delete the main page  Editcountitis  Edits Per Day  Editsummarisis  Editing Under the Influence  Embrace Stop Signs  Emerson  Fart  Five Fs of Wikipedia  Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E.
Spear-Shake  Go ahead, vandalize  How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb?
How to get away with UPE  How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle  How to vandalize correctly  How to win a citation war  Ignore all essays  Ignore every single rule  Is that even an essay?
Mess with the templates  My local pond  Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them  Legal vandalism  List of jokes about Wikipedia  LTTAUTMAOK  No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man  No one cares about your garage band  No one really cares  No, really  No sorcery threats  Notability is not eternal  Oops Defense  Play the game  Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you  Please bite the newbies  Please do not murder the newcomers  Pledge of Tranquility  R-e-s-p-e-c-t  Requests for medication  Requirements for adminship  Rouge admin  Rouge editor  Sarcasm is really helpful  Sausages for tasting  The Night Before Wikimas  The first rule of Wikipedia  The Five Pillars of Untruth  Things that should not be surprising  The WikiBible  Watchlistitis  Wikipedia is an MMORPG  WTF?
OMG!
TMD TLA.
ARG!
What Wikipedia is not/Outtakes  Why not create an account?
Reference desks  (?)
Noticeboards  (?)
Cheatsheet  (?)
Directories  (?)
About Wikipedia  (?)
Administration  Purpose  Principles  Policies and guidelines  What Wikipedia is not  Disclaimer ( parental advice )  Making requests  Who writes Wikipedia?
Help for readers  (?)
Advice for young editors  Avoiding common mistakes  Etiquette  Simplified Manual of Style  Simplified rule-set  "Ignore all rules"  "The rules are principles"  Style-tips  Tip of the day  Your first article ( article wizard )  Getting started  (?)
Why create an account?
Introductions by topic  Graphics tutorials  Picture tutorial  IRC (live chat) tutorial  VisualEditor user guide  Dos and don'ts  (?)
Accessibility  Biographies  Biographies (living)  Categorization  Consensus  Discussions  Disambiguation  Images  Leads  Links  Lists  References  Tables  Titles (of articles)  How-to pages and information pages  (?)
Appealing blocks  Article deletion  Categories  Citations/references  Referencing for beginners  Citation Style 1  Cite errors  References and page numbers  Convert  Diff  Editing  Minor edit  toolbar  edit conflict  Find sources  Files  Footnotes  Image deletion  Infoboxes  Linking ( link color )  Logging in  Merging  Page name  Renaming pages  Redirect  Passwords  Email confirmation  Reverting  Simple vandalism cleanup  Talk pages ( archiving  simple archiving )  User contributions  WP search protocol  Coding  (?)
Wiki markup  Barcharts  Calculations  Characters  Columns  Elevation  Hidden text  HTML  Lists  Magic words  Music symbols  Sections  Sounds  Tables  Templates  Transclusion  URL  Visual files  Directories  (?)
Reward board  Contests   Merchandise giveaways    WikiProject Wikipedia Awards    Kindness Campaign    v t e Useful links Daily pages  CAT:HELP  WP:ANI  WP:BLPN  WP:BOTN  WP:COIN  WP:DASH  WP:FTN  WP:HD  WP:MCQ  WP:NORN  WP:NPOVN  WP:PUMP ( /A  /M  /P  /R  /T )  WP:RD ( /C  /E  /H  /L  /M  /MA  /S )  WP:RFC ( /MEDIA  /BIO  /ECON  /HIST  /LANG  /NAME  /PAG  /PHIL  /POLY  /SCI  /SOC  /STYLE )  WP:RFF  WP:RSN  WP:SPI  WP:THIRD  WP:DRV )  Things to do  CAT:BACKLOG  CAT:M  CAT:WRI  WP:ABUSE  WP:AFC  WP:ASOF  WP:DPWL  WP:FAC  WP:FAR  WP:FPC  WP:GAN  WP:GAR  WP:KIND  WP:MISSING  WP:PR  WP:RD  WP:RP  WP:SPOKEN  WP:UW  WP:THQ  WP:VITAL  WP:WANTED  WP:WC  BrokenRedirects  Disambigs  LongPages  NewPages  OrphanPages  TagsPages  UncatImages  UncatPages  Resources  CAT:HOWTO  WP:AWARD  WP:CATEGORY  WP:CAT-R  WP:CITE  WP:CITET  WP:COPYEDIT  WP:CUTPASTE  WP:CUV  WP:DEPT  WP:DISAMBIG  WP:EDIT  WP:FOOT  WP:FORMULA  WP:HAT  WP:ICT  WP:LAYOUT  WP:LIBRARY  WP:MAGIC  WP:MERGE  WP:PIFU  WP:PRECEDENT  WP:REDIRECT  WP:STYLE  WP:SUMMARY  WP:TEMPLATE  CatTree  PrefixIndex  Policies / Guidelines  WP:3RR  WP:ADMIN  WP:AP  WP:APPEAL  WP:ATTACK  WP:AUTOBIO  WP:BAN  WP:BLANK  WP:BLOCK  WP:BOLD  WP:BOTPOL  WP:BUILD  WP:CANVASS  WP:CFORK  WP:CIVIL  WP:CONFLICT  WP:CONSENSUS  WP:COPYRIGHT  WP:DELETE  WP:DISCLAIM  WP:DISPUTE  WP:DISRUPTIVE  WP:DONTBITE  WP:DPR  WP:EP  WP:ETIQ  WP:EDITWAR  WP:FRINGE  WP:GAME  WP:GOOGLE  WP:HARASS  WP:HOAX  WP:IGNORE  WP:IUP  WP:LEAD  WP:LEGAL  WP:LIBEL  WP:LINKS  WP:LIST  WP:LIVING  WP:LOGOS  WP:M  WP:NAME  WP:NONFREE  WP:NONSENSE  WP:NOT  WP:NOTE  WP:NPOV  WP:NPS  WP:OFFICE  WP:ORIGINAL  WP:OVERSIGHT  WP:OWN  WP:PACL  WP:PD  WP:PEACOCK  WP:PERFORM  WP:POINT  WP:POLLING  WP:PROD  WP:PROTECT  WP:RELIABLE  WP:SELF  WP:SOCK  WP:SPAM  WP:SPEEDY  WP:STUB  WP:TALK  WP:TP  WP:TRIVIA  WP:USERBOX  WP:USERNAME  WP:USERPAGE  WP:VANDAL  WP:VANISH  WP:VERIFY  WP:WEASEL  WP:WHEEL  Administrators  CAT:AB  CAT:CSD  CAT:PER  CAT:RFU  WP:AE  WP:AIV  WP:AN  WP:ANEW  WP:ARL  WP:CP  WP:DGFA  WP:NAS  WP:OP  WP:RFA  WP:RFARB  WP:RFM  WP:RFPP  WP:RM  WP:RSPAM  WP:UAA  BlockLog  DelLog  ProtectLog  External links  Article statistics  Edit Counter  FIST  ISBNdb  Link checker  Make Reference  MissingTopics  Is Admin?
Wikichecker  WikiEN-l archives  Wiki ToDo       Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1216944924 " This is a list of recent changes to Wikipedia.
Other review tools  This page :  Discuss this page – What does this page mean?
diff hist   Marvel Cinematic Universe tie-in comics ‎  20:33   −3,098 ‎ ‎ Trailblazer101  talk  contribs ‎ (realign some tables, reformatting for better readability.)
Tag : ProveIt edit  diff hist   Batchelor, Northern Territory ‎  20:33   −37 ‎ ‎ Villaida  talk  contribs ‎ (fixed bare url)  Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   m  Manuel Lopes Rodrigues ‎  20:33   +16 ‎ ‎ Curador de Arte  talk  contribs ‎ Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   Alex Wright ‎  20:33   +5 ‎ ‎ WikiOriginal-9  talk  contribs ‎ (removed Category:20th-century professional wrestlers ; added Category:20th-century male professional wrestlers using HotCat )  diff hist   User:Kittyykawaii ‎  20:33   −303 ‎ ‎ Kittyykawaii  talk  contribs ‎ Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   The Ha-Ha Case ‎  20:33   +5 ‎ ‎ Lord Cornwallis  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Bibliography )  diff hist   My Teenage Girl ‎  20:33   +3 ‎ ‎ HongLock  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Aftermath )   diff hist   Talk:Marketing Hats ‎  20:33   +55 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   Talk:Disney Parks ‎  20:33   −38 ‎ ‎ 177.140.106.134  talk ‎ Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  diff hist   m  Jodie Comer ‎  20:33   −127 ‎ ‎ Joyous!
talk  contribs ‎ (Reverted 1 edit by Jenniferlopes344t45 ( talk ) to last revision by MuffinHunter0)  Tags : Twinkle  Undo  diff hist   Talk:Queens Down Under ‎  20:33   +55 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   Hume Cronyn ‎  20:33   −11 ‎ ‎ Kablammo  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Career : ce )   diff hist   Anil Mishra ‎  20:33   +669 ‎ ‎ 129.81.255.94  talk ‎ ( →‎Awards )  Tags : possible BLP issue or vandalism  Visual edit  diff hist   m  List of African American pioneers of Colorado ‎  20:33   0 ‎ ‎ WereSpielChequers  talk  contribs ‎ (typo)   diff hist   Mr. Wrestling II ‎  20:33   +5 ‎ ‎ WikiOriginal-9  talk  contribs ‎ (removed Category:20th-century professional wrestlers ; added Category:20th-century male professional wrestlers using HotCat )  diff hist   Love Productions ‎  20:33   −907 ‎ ‎ Brojam  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Productions )   diff hist   User:Matthew74205/Weibull modulus ‎  20:33   +11 ‎ ‎ Matthew74205  talk  contribs ‎ (rewording for clarity)  Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   Giovanna Sandri ‎  20:33   +4 ‎ ‎ 2804:14c:1c5:8424:9122:11ea:4c9c:9222  talk ‎  diff hist   N  Talk:Rucycled ‎  20:33   +131 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   Rob Manfred ‎  20:33   −2,152 ‎ ‎ Muboshgu  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Oakland Athletics relocation to Las Vegas : remove items with no relevance to Manfred, this section is undue )   diff hist   m  Oldham ‎  20:33   −11 ‎ ‎ Chocolateediter  talk  contribs ‎ (adding industrial doesn’t to add much.
#article-section-source-editor)  Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile app edit  iOS app edit  diff hist   FBI season 6 ‎  20:33   +291 ‎ ‎ Zsoca28  talk  contribs ‎ Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  diff hist   N  Talk:Talent Show Extravaganza ‎  20:33   +131 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   HNK Gorica ‎  20:33   −30 ‎ ‎ Snowflake91  talk  contribs ‎ (translation is already in lead section)   Upload log  20:33   Stephengd9  talk  contribs uploaded File:Caroline Polachek 'Desire, I Want to Turn Into You, Everasking Edition' cover.jpg ‎ (Uploading a piece of non-free cover art using File Upload Wizard )   Tag : large non-free file  diff hist   Midland (band) ‎  20:33   +1 ‎ ‎ 71.187.49.129  talk ‎ Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  diff hist   SDSS J114816.64+525150.3 ‎  20:33   +71 ‎ ‎ 82.57.172.25  talk ‎ ( →‎Sources )   diff hist   Alexander Vindman ‎  20:33   +6 ‎ ‎ 38.42.219.94  talk ‎ ( →‎Television )   diff hist   Mr. Wrestling ‎  20:33   +5 ‎ ‎ WikiOriginal-9  talk  contribs ‎ (removed Category:20th-century professional wrestlers ; added Category:20th-century male professional wrestlers using HotCat )  diff hist   Talk:A deux c'est mieux ‎  20:33   +55 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   Wikipedia:Wiki Ed/University of Texas at Arlington/Corpus Linguistics (Spring 2024) ‎  20:33   +35 ‎ ‎ Aligist  talk  contribs ‎ (Updating course from dashboard.wikiedu.org)  Tag : dashboard.wikiedu.org   diff hist   Mumble Bumble ‎  20:33   +19 ‎ ‎ 186.189.91.188  talk ‎ Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  diff hist   User:Liz/CSD log ‎  20:33   +149 ‎ ‎ Liz  talk  contribs ‎ (Logging speedy deletion nomination of Category:Presidency of the Turkish Republic .)
Tag : Twinkle  diff hist   Talk:Bitch Stole My Look ‎  20:33   +55 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   Plev Ellis ‎  20:33   −4 ‎ ‎ Gerry1371  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   User talk:CeeGee ‎  20:33   +1,348 ‎ ‎ Liz  talk  contribs ‎ (Notification: speedy deletion nomination of Category:Presidency of the Turkish Republic .)
Tag : Twinkle  diff hist   Talk:Amar Singh Chamkila ‎  20:33   +349 ‎ ‎ Carlinal  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Chamkila's caste : Reply )  Tag : Reply  diff hist   Michael Young (industrial designer) ‎  20:33   +247 ‎ ‎ Cl3phact0  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Life and career : + ref )  Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   Mr. Wrestling II ‎  20:33   +22 ‎ ‎ WikiOriginal-9  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎External links : + )   diff hist   Girls Planet 999 ‎  20:33   +8 ‎ ‎ HongLock  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Aftermath )   diff hist   Youssef El Sherif ‎  20:33   +88 ‎ ‎ 102.45.142.121  talk ‎ ( →‎TV series )  Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  diff hist   Wikipedia:WikiProject University of Virginia ‎  20:33   −5 ‎ ‎ Bluerasberry  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎UVA community programs and events : Wikidata for research )   diff hist   Category:Presidency of the Turkish Republic ‎  20:33   +25 ‎ ‎ Liz  talk  contribs ‎ (Requesting speedy deletion ( CSD C1 ).)
Tag : Twinkle  diff hist   Talk:Bonjour Iedereen ‎  20:32   +55 ‎ ‎ TAnthony  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Add WP banner(s) )  Tag : AWB  diff hist   Dubai Media Incorporated ‎  20:32   −34 ‎ ‎ Meno25  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎External links )   diff hist   SLUB (software) ‎  20:32   +65 ‎ ‎ Widefox  talk  contribs ‎ (Adding local short description : "A Linux kernel memory management mechanism", overriding Wikidata description "one of the three memory handlers in the kernel Linux")  Tag : Shortdesc helper  diff hist   Category:Sikh warriors who died in battle ‎  20:32   +56 ‎ ‎ Marcocapelle  talk  contribs ‎ (added Category:Indian military personnel killed in action using HotCat )  Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  Advanced mobile edit  diff hist   User:Acroterion/ABM ‎  20:32   0 ‎ ‎ Acroterion  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Hajra Yamin ‎  20:32   +42 ‎ ‎ 2400:adcc:105:2200:38b4:9f48:cb62:7850  talk ‎    Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:RecentChanges "Wikimedia file upload wizard  Shortcut WP:FUW  Thank you for offering to contribute an image or other media file for use on Wikipedia.
This wizard will guide you through a questionnaire prompting you for the appropriate copyright and sourcing information for each file.
Please ensure you understand copyright and the image use policy before proceeding.
Upload your own or a freely licensed file  Uploads to Wikimedia Commons   Upload a non-free file  Uploads locally to Wikipedia; must comply with the non-free content criteria       You do not have JavaScript enabled  Sorry, in order to use this uploading script, JavaScript must be enabled.
You can still use the plain Special:Upload page to upload files to the English Wikipedia without JavaScript.
You are not currently logged in.
Sorry, in order to use this uploading script and to upload files, you need to be logged in with your named account.
Please log in and then try again.
Your account has not become confirmed yet.
Sorry, in order to upload files on the English Wikipedia, you need to have a confirmed account .
Normally, your account will become confirmed automatically once you have made 10 edits and four days have passed since you created it.
You may already be able to upload files on the Wikimedia Commons , but you can't do it on the English Wikipedia just yet.
If the file you want to upload has a free license, please go to Commons and upload it there.
Important note: if you don't want to wait until you are autoconfirmed, you may ask somebody else to upload a file for you at Wikipedia:Files for upload .
In very rare cases an administrator may make your account confirmed manually through a request at Wikipedia:Requests for permissions/Confirmed .
Step 1: Choose your file   File:   Choose a file from your computer.
Maximum file size: 100 MB.
Permitted file types: png, gif, jpg, jpeg, xcf, pdf, mid, mp3, mpeg, mpg, ogg, ogv, opus, svg, djvu, tiff, tif, oga, flac, wav, wave, webm, webp.
Step 2: Describe your file   Please provide a clear, descriptive name by which your file will be known on Wikipedia.
This name must be unique across the whole of Wikipedia, so please make it informative and easy to recognize.
It's no problem to use a fairly long name.
It may also include spaces, commas and most other punctuation marks.
Please also note that file names are case sensitive (with the exception of the first letter).
Good: "City of London, skyline from London City Hall, Oct 2008.jpg".
Bad : "Skyline.jpg", "DSC0001234.jpg".
Sorry, a few special characters and character combinations cannot be used in the filename for technical reasons.
This goes especially for # < >  | : { } / and ~~~ .
Your filename has been modified to avoid these.
Please check if it is okay now.
The filename you chose seems to be very short, or overly generic.
Please don't use:  Titles that consist only of very generic descriptive words (e.g.
"Sunset.jpg", "Townhall.jpg")  Titles that consist only of a person's first or last name, when that name is likely to be shared by many others (e.g.
"John.jpg", "Miller.jpg")  Titles that consist of mere numbers, of the kind often produced by digital cameras ("DSC_001234", "IMGP0345"), or random strings like those sometimes found on the web ("30996951316264l.jpg")     Existing file .
Last uploaded by Example user .
A file of this name already exists on Commons!
If you upload your file with this name, you will be masking the existing file and make it inaccessible.
Your new file will be displayed everywhere the existing file was previously used.
This should not be done, except in very rare exceptional cases.
Please don't upload your file under this name, unless you seriously know what you are doing.
Choose a different name for your new file instead.
If you want to replace the existing file with an uncontroversial, improved version of the same work, please go to Commons and upload it there, not here on the English Wikipedia's local wiki.
A file of this name already exists.
If you upload your file with this name, you will be overwriting the existing file.
Please don't do this, unless you have a good reason to:     No , I don't want to overwrite the existing file.
I will choose a different name for my new file instead.
Yes , I want to overwrite the existing file.
My file is merely a new, improved and uncontentious version of the same work.
The old description page, including the source and copyright information, will still be correct for the new version and can remain the same.
Yes , I want to overwrite the existing file, and I will use this wizard to add a new description and new source information for it.
The previous version was my own, or else I have made sure the previous uploader(s) don't object to this replacement.
Please provide a brief description of the contents of this file.
This will be stored and displayed as part of the file description page.
It is important that other editors are able to understand what this file is about.
What does this file show?
What is it a photo/diagram/recording of?
It will be helpful if you also add a wikilink to the article where you want to use it.
Step 3: Provide source and copyright information  It is very important that you read through the following options and questions, and provide all required information truthfully and carefully.
This is a free work.
I can demonstrate that it is legally okay for anybody to use, in Wikipedia and elsewhere, for any purpose.
Thank you for offering to upload a free work.
Wikipedia loves free files.
However, we would love it even more if you uploaded them on our sister project, the Wikimedia Commons .
Files uploaded on Commons can be used immediately here on Wikipedia as well as on all its sister projects.
Uploading files on Commons works just the same as here.
Your Wikipedia account will automatically work on Commons too.
Please consider uploading your file on Commons .
However, if you prefer to do it here instead, you may go ahead with this form.
You can also first use this form to collect the information about your file and then send it to Commons from here.
Copyright status:      This file is entirely my own work.
I am the copyright holder.
I made this myself, from scratch, without copying or incorporating anybody else's creative work, and I am willing to release it under a free license.
Please note that by "entirely self-made" we really mean just that.
Do not use this section for any of the following:  a scan or photograph you made of a painting, drawing, printed page or other item originally created by somebody else.
The copyright belongs to the original creator, not to you.
a screenshot or other kind of capture of a video, computer screen, TV programme or other kind of visual media.
a picture you created by modifying or copying some other picture or by combining several preexisting pictures made by somebody else.
a picture given to you by somebody else.
a picture you found somewhere on the Internet.
Editors who falsely declare such items as their "own work" will be blocked from editing .
Please describe how and when you created this item.
How?
(e.g.
: Where and on what kind of occasion did you take this photo?
How did you make this diagram?
etc.)
Date        (please use YYYY-MM-DD format if possible).
Publication:  Please indicate here if you have previously published this item elsewhere, e.g.
on your own website, your Flickr or Facebook account, etc., providing a link.
It is important that you place this work under a free license, which will allow everybody else to use it for any purpose, including both commercial and non-commercial purposes, and to modify it.
This license will be irrevocable.
This file was given to me by its owner.
The copyright owner of this file has given it to me for uploading on Wikipedia.
I can provide evidence that they have agreed to release it under a free license, for free use by anybody and for any purpose.
Please describe who owns this work and how you got it from them.
Owner/author:      Date of creation:     Source:   Where did you get the file from?
available online; was sent to me personally …)    Permission:   How did you receive the permission?
OTRS ticket received:      The license hasn't yet been forwarded, but I will do so shortly or ask the owner to send it.
I haven't got the evidence right now, but I will provide some if requested to do so.
Note: files without verifiable permissions may be deleted.
You may be better off obtaining proof of permission first.
This file is from a free published source.
I took it from a website or other published source, where its author has explicitly placed it under a free license, allowing free re-use by anybody.
Use this only if there is an explicit licensing statement in the source.
The website must explicitly say that the image is released under a license that allows free re-use for any purpose, e.g.
the Creative Commons Attribution license.
You must be able to point exactly to where it says this.
If the source website doesn't say so explicitly, please do not upload the file .
Author/owner:      Date of creation:     Source:   For web sources: please provide a link to the html web page where the file can be found ("http://...
.html"), not a direct link to the image file itself ("http://...
.jpg").
For print sources: provide full bibliographic information (author, title, publisher, year, page, etc.)
The copyright owner has chosen the following license for this file:   License:   Other:    Evidence:   Provide a link to where the author explicitly says that the file is released under a free license.
(if not visible on the source page itself).
This work is so old its copyright has expired This is an old photograph, or a photographic reproduction of an old painting, drawing, etc.
I can provide enough information about its author and provenance to prove that it is old enough for its copyright to have expired.
It is now legally in the Public Domain .
Original author:   Please name the original author of this work.
Lifetime:   Specify date of death, if applicable to public domain status.
In many cases, we need to be certain the author died before a certain year, in many cases before 1929.
Original publication:   Provide as much information as possible about the original time and place of publication of this work.
For print publications: provide full bibliographic information.
Date of publication:   Provide date of first publication, and date of creation if different.
Immediate source:   State exactly where you found this file.
For web sources: please provide a link to the html web page where the file can be found ("http://...
.html"), not a direct link to the image file itself ("http://...
.jpg").
Public Domain status:   This work is free of all copyrights because:    It was created and first published before 1929 and is therefore in the Public Domain in the US.
It was first published outside the US , and it was in the Public Domain in its country of origin by the " URAA date ".
For most countries, this means the author died 70 years before 1 January 1996, i.e.
before 1926.
Please look up the copyright rules for the specific country at  .
It was first published in the US before 1989 , and its copyright expired because it was published without a copyright notice and/or without the necessary copyright registration.
Please look up the exact rules at  .
Its copyright expired for some other reason.
.
Explanation:  Please provide any evidence necessary to verify the public domain status.
This file is in the Public Domain for some other reason.
I can demonstrate that this work is legally in the Public Domain, i.e.
nobody owns any copyrights on it.
This may be for a variety of reasons, for instance because it was created by the US Federal Government, or because it is too simple to attract any copyright.
Public Domain means that nobody owns any copyrights on this work.
It does not mean simply that it is freely viewable somewhere on the web or that it has been widely used by others.
This is not for images you simply found somewhere on the web.
Most images on the web are under copyright and belong to somebody, even if you believe the owner won't care about that copyright.
If it is in the public domain, you must be able to point to an actual law that makes it so.
If you can't point to such a law but merely found this image somewhere, then please do not upload it.
Author:   Please name the original author of this work.
Source:   State exactly where you found this file.
Date of creation:     Public Domain status:   This work is free of all copyrights because:    It was created by an agency of the US Federal Government.
This does not apply to most US state and local agencies , nor to governments of other countries!
It is an official governmental item, such as a flag, state emblem, banknote or postage stamp, from a country where such items are exempt from copyright according to local law.
This does not apply to all countries, nor does it usually apply to all publications!
(For instance, it usually doesn't apply to simple publicity photographs published on a governmental website.)
Please look up the copyright rules for the specific country in question.
If the country does not have an exemption rule that applies to this item, go on with the section for " non-free copyrighted works " below.
Explanation:  Add any explanation or evidence necessary to substantiate your statement above.
Cite and provide a link to the relevant law if possible.
It is too simple to be eligible for copyright.
This typically applies only to graphics that consist solely of simple geometric shapes and/or a few letters or words, or to items such as mathematical or chemical formulae.
It may apply to some very simple logos that do not contain complex pictorial elements.
It never applies to photographs!
It is in the Public Domain for some other reason.
Explanation:             This is a copyrighted, non-free work, but I believe it is Fair Use.
I have read the Wikipedia rules on Non-Free Content , and I am prepared to explain how the use of this file will meet the criteria set out there.
Please remember that you will need to demonstrate that:  The file will serve an important function in a particular article; ( NFCC8 )  It cannot be replaced by any other, free illustration that might yet be created; ( NFCC1 )  Its use does not negatively affect the commercial interests of its owner ( NFCC2 )  There will not be more non-free material used than necessary.
( NFCC3 )    This file will be used in the following article: Enter the name of exactly one Wikipedia article, without the ] brackets and without the "http://en.wikipedia.org/..." URL code.
It has to be an actual article, not a talkpage, template, user page, etc.
If you plan to use the file in more than one article, please name only one of them here.
Then, after uploading, open the image description page for editing and add your separate explanations for each additional article manually.
Example – article okay.
This article doesn't exist!
The article Example could not be found.
Please check the spelling, and make sure you enter the name of an existing article in which you will include this file.
If this is an article you are only planning to write, please write it first and upload the file afterwards.
This is not an actual encyclopedia article!
The page Example is not in the main article namespace.
Non-free files can only be used in mainspace article pages, not on a user page, talk page, template, etc.
Please upload this file only if it is going to be used in an actual article.
If this page is an article draft in your user space, we're sorry, but we must ask you to wait until the page is ready and has been moved into mainspace, and only upload the file after that.
This is a disambiguation page!
The page Example is not a real article, but a disambiguation page pointing to a number of other pages.
Please check and enter the exact title of the actual target article you meant.
Non-free use rationale      This image is the object of discussion in an article.
This is a copyrighted artwork or photograph, and the image itself is the topic of discussion in the article.
The discussion is about the photograph or painting as such, as a creative work, not just about the thing or person it shows.
Which of these options describes this item best?
Who created this work?
Author/owner:      Date:     Source:   State exactly where you found this file.
Usage:      The article as a whole is dedicated specifically to a discussion of this particular photograph/painting.
(It is not just about the person or thing shown in the picture.)
There is a substantial amount of encyclopedic discussion of this particular photograph/painting ( not just about the person or thing shown in it) in this article.
The illustration is specifically needed to support the following point:   If neither of these two statements applies, then please do not upload this image.
This section is not for images used merely to illustrate an article about a person or thing, showing what that person or thing look like.
This is a depiction of a copyrighted three-dimensional work or building , which is the object of discussion in an article.
This is a photograph or other kind of depiction of a copyrighted, three-dimensional creative work, such as a statue or work of architecture.
The article contains a discussion of that work which requires illustration.
The photograph as such is free, or was provided by the creator of the sculpture.
First describe who created the original work depicted:   Creator:      Date:      Usage:      The article as a whole is dedicated specifically to this work.
There is a substantial amount of encyclopedic discussion of this work in this article.
The illustration is specifically needed to support the following point:    Now describe who created the image :   Author:      Date:     Source:   State exactly where you found this file.
Image status      The image was created and published by the same author who also holds the rights to the original object, and no alternative depiction could be suitably created.
The author of the image has released the photographic work under a free license, or it is in the public domain: Name the license or describe the public domain status, adding any necessary evidence to make the licensing status verifiable.
This is an excerpt from a copyrighted work .
This is an excerpt from a copyrighted work, e.g.
a screenshot from a movie or TV programme, a panel from a comic, or a sound sample from a song.
Its presence is needed to support a piece of explicit critical discussion in an article related to that work or its creator(s).
Author:   (author / copyright owner of the original work)    Date of creation:     Source:   (where exactly did you get this file from?)
Please explain what exactly in the article it is that you want to illustrate with this.
Typically, the illustration must be used to support some specific issue of discussion in the article.
Please be concrete and specific.
Don't just copy boilerplate statements from elsewhere.
State clearly, in your own words, what this particular file will be doing in this particular article.
If necessary, please explain why this purpose cannot be achieved through text alone.
This is the official cover art of a work.
This is the cover or dustjacket of a book, the cover of a CD or video, the official release poster of a movie, or a comparable item.
It will be included as that work's primary means of visual identification, at the top of the article about the book, movie, etc.
in question.
Note: If you plan to use it for any other purpose than this, please tick the box for "other non-free work" below.
Author:   (author / copyright owner of the original work)    Date of publication:     Source:   (where exactly did you get this file from?)
This image will be shown as a primary means of visual identification at the top of the article dedicated to the work in question.
A standard fair use rationale will be added that matches this type of use.
If you plan to use the file for any purpose other than this, please do not use this section, but the one labelled "other type of non-free work" below.
This is a logo of an organization , company, brand, etc.
This is an official logo of an entity that is the subject of a Wikipedia article.
It will be included as that entity's primary means of visual identification, at the top of the article in question.
Source:   (where exactly did you get this file from?)
This image will be shown as a primary means of visual identification at the top of the article dedicated to the entity in question.
This is a historical portrait of a person no longer alive.
This is a historical photograph or other depiction of a person who is no longer alive.
It will be used as the primary means of visual identification of that person in the article about them.
Deceased since:   (This type of file can typically only be used with people who are no longer alive.)
Author:   (Who made this image?)
Original publication:   (Where, when and how was this image first published?)
Date of publication:     Source:   (Where exactly did you get this file from?)
This image will be shown as a primary means of visual identification at the top of the article dedicated to the person in question.
Please explain why a free alternative to this image cannot be found.
For subjects who died recently: have you made a reasonable effort to find people who might possess photographs of this person and might be willing to release one?
For subjects who lived in the early-to-mid 20th century: have you considered if there might be an older photograph that has fallen in the public domain?
Please explain why you are confident that our use of the file will not harm any commercial opportunities of its owner.
We will typically not use a file if its owner has a potential commercial interest in its use, and if our use of it would compete with its original market role.
This is some other kind of non-free work that I believe is legitimate Fair Use.
This is a copyrighted work whose use does not fall into any of the classes above.
I have read the Wikipedia rules on Non-free content , and I will explain how this file meets all of the criteria set out there.
Please explain what exact purpose this file will serve in the article.
Your explanation must make it clear why the article would be significantly worse off without this file.
Please explain why this purpose could not be served by text alone.
Please explain why this purpose could not be served with an alternative, free illustration that could yet be found or created.
For a file to be deemed replaceable, it is not necessary that a suitable replacement already exists.
Even if it is merely possible that a replacement could be created, we will not use the non-free file.
Remember that the use of non-free files must be minimal.
This can mean several things:  Don't use more files per article/topic than necessary  Don't use the same file in more articles than necessary  Don't use larger excerpts of a single work than necessary  Don't use images of higher resolution than necessary  In view of this, please explain how the use of this file will be minimal.
Special source and license conditions (optional)         Any further relevant information about this file?
Edit summary:  A brief description of why you are overwriting this file.
This will not be saved on the description page, but will be shown in its edit history.
Yes , I want this file to be immediately available in all Wikimedia projects, in all languages.
I will upload it on the Wikimedia Commons .
Clicking this button will redirect you to a page on Commons.
This will only work if you are already logged in there, which is likely the case if you have a unified account .
Check here to see if you are logged in.
No , I want to upload this file locally.
This way it can be used only on the English Wikipedia.
We urge you to upload it to the Commons unless there is a very good reason for it to stay local.
Often such local files are copied to the Commons for use elsewhere and deleted locally, requiring extra work for other volunteers.
If you do not want your file to be copied to Commons and deleted locally, consider adding the {{ Keep local }} tag.
Reset this form and start over.
This file doesn't fit either of the categories above.
This file doesn't seem to fall into either of the classes above, or I am not certain what its status is.
I found this file somewhere, but I don't really know who made it or who owns it.
Well, we're very sorry, but if you're not sure about this file's copyright status, or if it doesn't fit into any of the groups above, then: Please don't upload it.
Really, please don't.
Even if you think it would make for a great addition to an article.
We really take these copyright rules very seriously on Wikipedia.
Note that media is assumed to be fully-copyrighted unless shown otherwise; the burden is on the uploader.
In particular, please don't upload:  any file you simply found on some website, without knowing who its author or copyright owner is.
any file you found somewhere, even if you have good reason to believe it has a copyright owner who would not mind us using it, but you don't have an explicit licensing statement from them.
any file that was released for publicity purposes by its owners but doesn't have a fully-free license for free re-use for all purposes.
any file credited to a commercial image agency, such as Reuters, AP or Getty Images.
Such files normally cannot be used even under the "Fair Use" rules, except in rare cases.
any file that is licensed for use exclusively on Wikipedia, or is free except that the free license excludes commercial use.
If you are in any doubt, please ask some experienced editors for advice before uploading.
People will be happy to assist you at Wikipedia:Media copyright questions .
Preview (test)  This is the data that will be submitted to upload:   Filename:     Edit summary:     Text:           Upload in process  Your file is being uploaded.
This might take a minute or two, depending on the size of the file and the speed of your internet connection.
Once uploading is completed, you will find your new file at this link: File:Example.jpg     File successfully uploaded   Your file has been uploaded successfully and can now be found here: File:Example.jpg  Please follow the link and check that the image description page has all the information you meant to include.
If you want to change the description, just go to the image page, click the "edit" tab at the top of the page and edit just as you would edit any other page.
Do not go through this upload form again, unless you want to replace the actual file with a new version.
To insert this file into an article, you may want to use code similar to the following:  ]  If you wish to make a link to the file in text, without actually showing the image, for instance when discussing the image on a talk page, you can use the following (mark the ":" after the initial brackets!
):  ]  See Wikipedia:Picture tutorial for more detailed help on how to insert and position images in pages.
Thank you for using the File Upload Wizard.
Please leave your feedback, comments, bug reports or suggestions on the talk page .
Uploading media files Commons Wikipedia   Commons Wizard (recommended for free files)  Plain form for Commons (experienced users)  Old form     Files for upload process (recommended for new users)  Plain form for local uploads (experienced users)  Old guided form   Help and guidelines  Ask copyright questions  Image use policy  Non-free content  This wizard  Documentation  Script  Discuss        Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:File_upload_wizard&oldid=1164364166 " Username (help me choose) Your username is public and cannot be made private later.
Password It is recommended to use a unique password that you are not using on any other website.
Confirm password Email address (recommended) Email is required to recover your account if you lose your password.
CAPTCHA Security check Refresh  Can't see the image?
Request an account Create your account         Wikipedia is made by people like you.
1,214,702,367 edits 6,813,562 articles 123,552 recent contributors  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CreateAccount " Username Password  Keep me logged in (for up to one year) Log in Help with logging in Forgot your password?
Don't have an account?
This is the contributions page for an IP user, identified by the user's IP address .
Many IP addresses change periodically, and are often shared by several users.
If you are an IP user, you may create an account or log in to avoid future confusion with other IP users.
Registering also hides your IP address.
( WHOIS  ( alt • old )  Geolocate  ( Alternate )  Proxy Checker  Current blocks  XTools  Global contributions )  ( RIRs : Africa  America  Asia-Pacific  Europe  Latin America/Caribbean )     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Contributions/95.102.48.153 "Welcome to this talk page People on Wikipedia can use this talk page to post a public message about edits made from the IP address you are currently using.
Many IP addresses change periodically, and are often shared by several people.
You may create an account or log in to avoid future confusion with other logged out users.
Creating an account also hides your IP address.
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:95.102.48.153 "This  level-3 vital article is rated C-class on Wikipedia's content assessment scale.
It is of interest to the following WikiProjects :    Mathematics  Top‑priority  Mathematics portal This article is within the scope of WikiProject Mathematics , a collaborative effort to improve the coverage of mathematics on Wikipedia.
If you would like to participate, please visit the project page, where you can join the discussion and see a list of open tasks.
Mathematics Wikipedia:WikiProject Mathematics Template:WikiProject Mathematics mathematics articles Top This article has been rated as Top-priority on the project's priority scale .
Daily pageviews of this article A graph should have been displayed here but graphs are temporarily disabled .
Until they are enabled again, visit the interactive graph at pageviews.wmcloud.org  effective proof  What is an effective proof?
— Preceding unsigned comment added by 2001:628:2120:601:7447:9B9B:6C18:BF6E ( talk ) 11:49, 9 December 2015 (UTC)   Informal proofs  I removed two paragraphs because they contain numerous statements that I can not verify.
For example, the second sentence in the first paragraph I removed: "In the context of proof theory, where purely formal proofs are considered, such not entirely formal demonstrations in mathematics are often called "social proofs"".
I've never heard of "social proofs" and when I clicked on the link "proof theory" in this sentence, it didn't even mention "social proofs".
So apparantly the phrase "social proofs" is not used as often as this sentence suggested.
The rest of these two paragraphs was of poor quality as well.
Jan 12, 2005.
— The preceding unsigned comment was added by  68.35.253.247 ( talk • contribs ) .
I'm sorry, but I think it is bad manners to delete material because you cannot verify it without asking about it first.
Similarly, poor quality should be rewritten instead of deleted.
For instance, the first sentence you deleted read "Proofs employ logic but usually include some amount of natural language which of course admits some ambiguity."
What is wrong about that?
Hence, I reverted your removal with the exception about the phrase mentioning "social proofs", where you at least gave some evidence.
-- Jitse Niesen ( talk ) 13:34, 12 January 2006 (UTC)  While it is true that most proofs do use natural language, it is also true that the only proofs that mathematicians will accept are those that (at least in principle) can be reduced to logic + ZFC.
The ambiguity of natural language must be clearly resolvable from the given context, if not, the argument will not be accepted by mathematicians as a valid proof.
Thus to say that ambiguity is allowed in mathematical proofs is misleading, every statement made during the proof must have (given the context) only one possible meaning.
MvH Jan 12, 2005.
Firstly, welcome at Wikipedia!
I understood the sentence "Proofs employ logic but usually include some amount of natural language which of course admits some ambiguity" as meaning that proofs usually include some amount of natural language and that natural language admits some ambiguity without implying that proof may admit ambiguity, but I can see your point.
Saying that proofs must be reducable to logic + ZFC is a theoretical construct.
In practice, which proofs are deemed acceptable is not an easy thing to determine.
Standards differ; at least historically (some proofs accepted in say Euler's time wouldn't be accepted nowadays) and I think also across areas within mathematics.
I think there is a social aspect here, proofs are partially means to convince others that certain results are true.
This aspect arises sometimes in conversations between mathematicians; I assume that there is also scholarly work in this direction but this is really not my speciality.
I think that this aspect should be mentioned in this article.
This is why I disagreed with your removal, though I now regret the violence with which I disagreed, sorry about it.
I do agree that these two paragraphs can be improved a lot and I hope you will be able to do so.
If you still think that it would be better to remove the fragment, please say so and I'll ask some logicians what they think about it.
-- Jitse Niesen ( talk ) 22:23, 12 January 2006 (UTC)  I think that in concrete examples of proofs, practically all mathematicians have the same opinion about when a proof is valid and when it is not (although they might ignore some of the philosophical issues and foundational issues studied by logicians and set theorists).
But that's just an observation about mathematical proofs, and not a definition.
In principle, a complete proof is something that uses only logic, ZFC, and previously proven results.
However, it would be too cumbersome to spell everything out in terms of logic; details (especially those that don't help the understanding) have to be skipped because otherwise most proofs would become so long that they would be of no value to anyone (except to a computer).
This raises the question: which details may be omitted?
The answer is a practical one: For a mathematician, a proof is valid when a reader can reasonably be expected to fill in the details up to any level of detail that the reader desires.
For instance, if you send a paper to the Journal of SomeAreaInMath, you may assume that your reader masters that SomeAreaInMath at PhD level and is familiar with common notation in that part of math.
If such readers can check the proof and fill in the details with reasonable effort, then the proof is considered to be complete.
While this might not sound very precise, in practice there is a near unanimous agreement about what constitutes a valid proof and what does not.
A good proof must not contain any statement that could be misinterpreted due to ambiguity.
If there are ambiguous statements that are not easily resolved then the reader is justified in rejecting the proof as unreadable.
MvH 12 Jan 2006.
PS.
Standards about what is a valid proof have indeed changed historically.
But that does not mean that there still is a debate among mathematicians about what constitutes a valid proof.
I think that "may use logic, ZFC, previously proven results, and may omit details that a reader can be expected to fill in" are the generally accepted criteria for judging validity of a proof.
MVH Jan 12, 2006.
I remember attending a lecture given by Graham Higman in which, in response to a question, said something like (I can't remember the exact words - it was about 30 years ago!)
"A proof is a form of words that convinces the mathamatical community of the truth of a proposition".
Interestingly no one challenged this although there were some emminent mathematicians in the audience.
How many mathematicians could quote the axioms of ZFC (Even if they were once required to attend a course on the subject)?
Most could quote some version of the Axiom of Choice (AC) and perhaps the Axiom of Infinity, but I don't think most mathematicians have ever really considered the philosophical (not sure if that is the right word to use here!)
status of the axioms.
For instance most mathematicians would take acceptance or non-acceptance of AC mark the borderline between constructivist and non-constructivist versions of mathematics however this is not the case.
Take AC in the form - I am being deliberately informal here - "Given an infinite collection of non-empty sets there is a set which contains precisely one element of each".
To a platonist, one who believes in the literal eternal existence of mathematical objects this is non-controversial.
However an intuitionist the claim to be able to exhibit an infinite collection of sets precisely is the claim that one can exhibit an element of each set so again the axiom is again uncontroversial.
It is only when one adopts a "half-hearted" version of constructivism, somewhere between platonism and intuitionism that the axiom of choice becomes controversial.
I would suggest (this is only an opinion, I have not made a scientific survey!)
the notion that it is the business of mathematics to contruct axiomatic systems and prove things inside them.).
On this view one could accept ZFC on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and reject it on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
Bernard Hurley 09:21, 1 October 2006 (UTC)  Informal proofs, continued  The intro currently says that in the great body of math, ZFC is the standard foundation.
I think this statement gives a ludicrously wrong impression.
It's like saying that for most nonfiction authors, the Dewey Decimal system is the standard method of organizing knowledge.
-- Jorend 15:32, 14 December 2006 (UTC)   Formal and informal proof  I made a link to the section at Proof theory which mentions that formal proofs can be automatically checked but are harder to find (although even the latter is computable, if I understand Godel correctly; it's just that you can't necessarily tell if a proof exists to find).
It would be good to say a bit more about this, either here or there: specifically (a) how "hard" it is to convert informal into formal proofs, and (b) the implications for the extent to which it is really "known" that most "theorems" are indeed true.
A distinction is often made between absolute truth in mathematics and empirical truth in science, but the predominance of informality calls this into question.
(Presumably the answer to (a) is therefore "very"; can anything more precise be said?)
—Preceding unsigned comment added by 194.81.223.66 ( talk ) 10:39, 19 October 2007 (UTC)   Prove everything  If the purpose of mathematical proof is to prove everything starting from a set of axioms , shouldn't all mathematical proofs provide links to what comes previously, so that we could trace every proof back to the axioms?
--anonymous comment  Within proof theory, quite a lot of proofs do quote any 'standard results' used, which in turn can be used to further trace back results to the axiom set used.
For most practical purposes, however, it is enough to know that a result has been widely established as correct.
Having said that, I'm not sure what you're suggesting here as to updating the article.
--anonymous comment To the original poster:  You're right.
But math is not this sort of grand project to build everything on ZFC.
Don't get me wrong, such things exist.
I'm a huge fan of Metamath , for example.
But proofs serve many, many purposes, not just one.
Say you're working on group theory .
You don't really care about the details of predicate calculus and ZFC.
You just want certain things to work, like "if A = B then B = A".
You don't care how, and you certainly aren't going to cite a proof of "the reflexive property of equality" explicitly in your work.
In short, you're imagining a cetain level of rigour, that's way beyond what your average mathematician needs.
Because his purpose in writing proofs isn't what you imagine.
You really should check out Metamath.
Here's a giant library of proofs that all explicitly link backward exactly as you suggest.
But Metamath proofs don't fulfill the other purposes of proofs particularly well...
purposes like communicating the mathematician's line of thought.
-- Jorend 15:10, 14 December 2006 (UTC)  Moving  IMHO this could be moved to proof (mathematics) .
What do you think?
googl  t 19:27, 15 August 2006 (UTC)   Seems reasonable, although I don't really know if it's worth the trouble.
People are more likely to search Mathematical proof than Proof (mathematics).
Meekohi 17:05, 17 August 2006 (UTC)  Proof by Transposition?
I've never heard this term before; I've always called this technique "Proving the Contrapositive ."
Is it possible to put both terms in that heading, or at least a note in the section that it's talking about the contrapositive here?
I'm eager to assist with this project (including the overall WikiProject: Mathematics ), so please let me know how I can help.
Feel free to leave a message on my Talk page to do so.
Thanks, JaimeLesMaths 05:39, 28 September 2006 (UTC)   Contraposition and transposition are different (but related) concepts - see their articles.
The method referred to under the heading "Transposition" depends on the rule (P → Q) ↔  (~Q →  ~P), which is the rule of transposition, hence it is properly called "Proof by transposition".
Gandalf61 13:05, 28 September 2006 (UTC)  OK, so transposition is the rule that states that a statement is logically equivalent to its contrapositive.
Then I'm for keeping the heading the same and just adding that the formal name for the referenced equivalent statement is the contrapositive .
Or maybe just even a See Also: Contrapositive would do.
-- JaimeLesMaths 06:07, 30 September 2006 (UTC)  Examples?
I added an example to the Proof by Contradiction sub-section in an effort to beef up the content and make the concepts more understandable.
I think it would be great to add such examples to all such sub-sections.
Thoughts?
-- JaimeLesMaths 06:25, 28 September 2006 (UTC)   Nice idea, but this article is not the right place.
Mathematical proof is meant to be a short survey article with links to more detailed articles.
The "Types of proof" section started out as an annotated list of proof types.
Then someone added sub-headings.
Now you are proposing examples of every method of proof that it refers to.
With all these additions, the article will become too long, and new readers will not be able to see the wood for the trees.
Examples belong in the detailed articles themselves - so the example of proof by contradiction that you have added should be moved to the proof by contradiction article.
Gandalf61 11:42, 28 September 2006 (UTC)  I like the idea of having an example proof.
Prefreably the simplest one about.
One example would help readers understand the concept of proof in general as distinct from particular methods of proof.
In general this artice needs considerable expansion to get it above its Start-status.
This is particularly important as the article is one of Wikipedia 1.0 core topics suplements so is of high visability.
-- Salix alba ( talk ) 12:39, 28 September 2006 (UTC)  But my fear is that this article then becomes bloated with multiple examples, and before long someone slaps a "too technical" tag on it, and someone else start to write a simpler introductory article, and the cycle starts all over again !
Gandalf61 09:42, 29 September 2006 (UTC)  I certainly don't want the article to get too bloated, and I see now that the proof I gave is also provided in the reductio ad absurdum article.
Perhaps instead of a full example in each one, a direct link to an example in the appropriate article with a descriptive title of what is being proved?
But at least one full example of a proof (perhaps annotated in detail?)
is needed, I think, though not necessarily the one I provided.
Other than that, even though this is a survey article, it needs more meat/eggplant to it.
I don't even know if I support this idea, but would a section of "common mistakes" in proof be useful?
Or at least a link to logical fallacies .
-- JaimeLesMaths 06:19, 30 September 2006 (UTC)  Visual for Page  Fermat's Enigma: The Epic Quest to Solve the World's Greatest Mathematical Problem by Simon Singh has a picture of the first page of the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.
Might be a nice visual for the page, though I'm not 100% sure about policy for putting it in here.
I guess my question is if the proof itself is considered "public domain" or not.
In any case, to get this up to featured article standards, some visual would be nice.
Any other suggestions?
-- JaimeLesMaths 06:25, 28 September 2006 (UTC)   Bill Casselman has a beautiful image of a fragment of Elements which can be found at http://www.math.ubc.ca/~cass/Euclid/papyrus/tha.jpg .
It'd make for a great picture if there were a "history" section in this article.
I've never uploaded an image before, so I'm not sure how to go about it.
I think he took the photo himself; I could email to see what sort of copyright he claims on it.
shotwell 16:03, 8 October 2006 (UTC)   I think it makes a great picture regardless of where it was placed in the article.
If it's available, let's use it.
I'm not sure of the picture uploading process either, but I'm sure someone here can help us out.
-- JaimeLesMaths 00:10, 9 October 2006 (UTC)   Proposition II.5 from Euclid's Elements Uploading a picture is not that hard (but not completely straightforward either).
It's explained at Wikipedia:Uploading images and commons:Commons:First step .
Anyway, I uploaded the picture (see at the right).
However, I'm not sure it's a good illustration for this pape as it only contains the theorem, not the proof.
-- Jitse Niesen ( talk ) 07:19, 9 October 2006 (UTC)   I have not yet clarified the copyright on that picture with its author.
shotwell 12:39, 9 October 2006 (UTC)   And yeah, I suppose you're right about its suitability.
shotwell 12:45, 9 October 2006 (UTC)   Regarding copyright, as I understand it, the papyrus is written centuries ago and hence in the public domain.
Taking a picture is not a creative act and hence does not make the photographer eligible to claim copyright.
See Wikipedia:Public domain .
-- Jitse Niesen ( talk ) 03:58, 10 October 2006 (UTC)   It's been 7 years without a new picture; I think this one is great, and the diagram is the beginning of the proof, so I do think it is appropriate.
Four colour theorem  I'm wondering if its worth including something about the four colour theorem and other proofs which have only been mechnacially verified.
-- Salix alba ( talk ) 09:37, 1 October 2006 (UTC)   I think that's a good, commonly-known example for proof by exhaustion .
-- JaimeLesMaths 21:33, 3 October 2006 (UTC)  Fits in both echastion and computer sections, as well as in in aeshtetics section, all for different reasons, so mention it thrice.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 19:25, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  Methods of proof.
Hi everyone.
I was looking over the "Methods of proof" section and it feels very verbose, "probabilistic proof" for example feels more like an application of probability theory than much of a different approach to proof, similarly "combinatorial proof".
"Direct proof" clearly deserves mention as does "contradiction" or "contrapostion" or "transposition" or any one of the names it seems to be listed under.
"Induction" too is a well known method and so could be listed.
As for the others, how about moving them to a quick list of other common methods of proof and just keep short descriptions of the key ones?
Richard Thomas 01:01, 26 October 2006 (UTC)   Bijection?
The text from Bijection section of the article reads: "Usually a bijection is used to show that the two interpretations give the same result."
Was this meant to be part of the Combinatorial proof section?
I checked the Bijection article, but I didn't see anything there that made sense in the context of this article except for its relationship to Combinatorial proof .
I'm going to remove the heading for now, but feel free to put it back if the text is expanded and made clearer.
-- JaimeLesMaths  ( talk !
edits ) 22:04, 28 October 2006 (UTC)   Second proof by contradiction example  I'm moving this example here because, at the least, it needs formatting cleanup.
However, I don't think that this example is best for the article.
It's not mentioned in the main reductio ad absurdum article, and it's not easily comprehensible to non-mathematicians.
I want to be clear that I'm not wedded to the example I've added staying either (not trying to WP:OWN the article), but simply that this example needs some work/discussion before being re-added to the main article.
(See also discussion above about whether we should have any examples in article.)
edits ) 22:16, 28 October 2006 (UTC)   Another little problem in Number Theory can be proved using proof by contradiction.
The DIVISION ALGORITHM states that : Given any integers a and b with a not equal to 0, there exist unique integers q and r such that b =q a +r , 0<_r<| a |.
If b is indivisible by a , then r satisfies the stronger inequality 0<r<| a | LEMMA 1.
If an integer u divides an integer v, v not equal to 0,then v=up, p not equal to 0.
hence |v| = |up| = |u| |p|.
As p is not equal to 0 and |q| is either greater than or equal to 1 , thus |v| is greater than or equal to |u| Proof:Consider S = { b-a k | b-a k >_0, k belongs to Z ,the set of integers }
Clearly, b + |ab| belongs to S .
Thus, S is non-empty.
By the well-ordering principle, S has a least element, say b-' a q = r.
If r>_ |' a | , then 0<_r-| a |<r ; and r-| a | belongs to S : which is a contradiction!
Thus, 0<_r<| a |
Now, to prove the uniqueness of q and r, let b= a m + n and also b = a k + l' with 0<_n<| a | and 0<_l<| a |.
If n is not equal to l , let l>n .
then 0< l-n <| a |.
But l-n=a(m-k) .
Thus a divides (l-n).
But this contradicts lemma 1.
Thus,  m = k and n = l .
Proof archive - Do we need one?
The "Proof Archive" from the German Wikipedia.
(Is this something we should get in the English Wikipedia?)
-- Johnbibby That is not the German Wikipedia, but the German wikibooks .
Wikipedia is an encyclopaedia, Wikibooks are text books.
On the general point on whether we should have proofs in an encyclopaedia, see Wikipedia:Manual of Style (mathematics)#Proofs for what's probably the current feeling, Wikipedia:WikiProject Mathematics/Proofs for some discussion, and Category:Article proofs for something similar to the Beweisarchiv.
I don't want to shoot down your idea immediately, but only to make you aware that the place of proofs here has been discussed before.
-- Jitse Niesen ( talk ) 02:12, 4 November 2006 (UTC)  Proof by construction example - huh?
Am I going ga-ga, or is the example in "proof by construction" just nuts?
If AD is a median and G is the centroid then BG extended is another median and therefore X is the midpoint of AC.
Where's this 1:5 coming from???
Anyway, even if this example were correct, it wouldn't be especially helpful in explaining what proof by construction is.
The main article on constructive proofs is a far clearer explanation, and gives the example of transcendental numbers, which provide a good example of the distinction between non-constructive existence proofs and constructive ones.
Could someone who's more closely involved with this project have a look at this issue and fix it up?
Hugh McManus 08:50, 1 June 2007 (UTC)   Geometric example in "Proof by construction" didn't make sense to me either, so I have replaced it with the example that is used in the proof by construction article.
Gandalf61 12:48, 1 June 2007 (UTC)  Disagree with the first paragraph  I have to disagree with this: In mathematics, a proof is a demonstration that, assuming certain axioms and rules of inference, some statement is necessarily true.
I don't think that this has ever been a standard definition of "mathematical proof".
For example Euclids' proof that there are infinitely many primes couldn't be expressed in the "axiom->theorem" form until Peano axiomatized arithmetic, and have been called "a proof" for centuries (togheter with many others that didn't have the "axiom->theorem" form until Zermelo&C.
axiomatized set theory or Robinson axiomatized Non-Standard Analysis).
Moreover:
Why a proof of the irrationality of e should be "a demostration that assuming certain axioms and rules of inference e is necessarily irrational" and not just "a demostration that e is irrational"?
In virtually all branches of mathematics, the assumed axioms are ZFC (Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, with the axiom of choice), unless indicated otherwise.
ZFC formalizes mathematical intuition about set theory, and set theory suffices to describe contemporary algebra and analysis.
This is arbitrary: "Assumed" by whom?
"Unless indicated otherwise" according to what?
Why ZFC and not NBG or New Foundation?
Virtually all mathetaticians make proofs without ever knowing exactly what ZFC (NBG or whatsover) is and having no idea of how the ZFC axioms would work in their (informal) proof  What about Synthetic geometry or visual geometric proofs of algebraic equalities?
What have they to do with ZFC?
-- Pokipsy76 ( talk ) 10:30, 1 January 2008 (UTC)   I'll propose a rewrite and see if that gets the changes started: In mathematics, a proof is a rigorous demonstration that , assuming certain axioms and rules of inference, some statement is necessarily true , within the accepted standards of the field .
A proof is a logical argument, not an empirical one.
That is, one must demonstrate that a proposition is true in all relevant cases before it is considered a theorem of mathematics .
An unproven proposition for which there is some sort of empirical evidence believed (but not proven) to be true is known as a conjecture.
This is a really rough set of changes, but I thought I'd try to get the ball rolling.
The ZFC stuff might be rephrased and relocated to another part of the article (as opposed to just struck entirely).
Also, I didn't wiki-link anything, although there's alot of that missing I think from this paragraph (as it is now, and in this rough draft).
-- Cheeser1 ( talk ) 22:39, 3 January 2008 (UTC)   This is an improvement.
Some suggestions for modifications to this replacement text: Replace statement by mathematical statement (and hyperlink).
Replace rigorous by: convincing .
Not all demonstrations that are commonly accepted as a valid proof within "the accepted standards of the field" are rigorous.
We may instead wish to add some paragraph or sentence somewhere stating that informal proofs are generally considered acceptable when it is obvious to experts in the field how to make them formal and rigorous.
Replace one must demonstrate by: the proof must demonstrate .
Replace all relevant cases by: all cases to which it applies, without a single exception  Add after believed : or strongly suspected .
The part (but not proven) is redundant and can be deleted.
Applying this results in the following text: In mathematics , a proof is a convincing demonstration that some mathematical statement is necessarily true, within the accepted standards of the field.
That is, the proof must demonstrate that a proposition is true in all cases to which it applies, without a single exception.
An unproven proposition believed or strongly suspected to be true is known as a conjecture .
-- Lambiam 10:20, 4 January 2008 (UTC)  It seems OK, let's edit the paragraph.-- Pokipsy76 ( talk ) 17:38, 8 January 2008 (UTC)  Done -- Lambiam 22:08, 8 January 2008 (UTC)  I like the changes you made, and I agree that it definitely sounds better now.
I'm glad we fixed it up.
-- Cheeser1 ( talk ) 22:54, 8 January 2008 (UTC)  formal proofs  I removed a statement that mathematical proofs are formal proofs .
Certainly there is a formal character of mathematical proofs.
But it is not the sense described in the article formal proof .
Mathematical proofs are almost always expressed in natural language, not in a formal language .
While it is commonly assumed that mathematical proofs could be recast as formal proofs, that doesn't mean that they are formal proofs to begin with.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 02:22, 12 May 2008 (UTC)   So now I'm wondering how it works into the article.
The issue you describe seems to me like content for the lede.
If that is the way people see it.
The truth is that a mathematical proof itself is an abstract object.
(However, I am not interested in pushing that issue here.)
It is that abstraction that manifests in natural or formal language.
We don't need to harp on that, however I would like to provide a path for those who want some fundamentals.
Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 03:39, 12 May 2008 (UTC)   No, the proof is not an abstract object, though it may, and likely does, contain various types of abstractions.
Tparameter ( talk ) 04:07, 12 May 2008 (UTC)   No, Tparameter, I am absolutely clear: the proof itself is an abstract object.
When you see chalk lines on a board, or ink marks on a page representing in language a proof, really what you are talking about is a token of the type of abstract object that the proof is.
The many and varied tokens of the same proof are the ones, for instance, in a French mathematics class, and and American one...
they talk about the SAME proof do they not?
Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 06:08, 12 May 2008 (UTC)   This is why these things need to be in the article.
Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 06:09, 12 May 2008 (UTC)  What you're saying is not necessarily true, and is therefore not a rule, and thus should not be discussed in the article.
An analogy to what you're trying to say might be a vector compared to an instance of that vector - the abstraction compared to a particular instance of it.
However, you assume there is some abstract proof floating in some layer of abstraction above where the mathematician/logician lays out his proof.
Not necessarily true.
More importantly, not the appropriate place to discuss this type of abstract concept.
It will only add confusion, and take away from the substance of the article.
You might try this sort of thing in happy , pointing out that anyone being happy is only a token representation of the abstract concept of "happiness".
Of course, I'm being facetious - but, hopefully you get my point.
This token distinction is a discussion of its own, and should not be introduced in every conceivable place it can be imagined.
Better to defer to mathematicians (not referring to myself) in math articles, IMO.
All the best.
Tparameter ( talk ) 07:34, 12 May 2008 (UTC)   Yes, it is, in fact, necessarily true that a mathematical proof is an abstract object.
I don't seek to insert this kind of stuff in any old article like happy.
There are a few topics for which it is important, and for the most part they are in the template:logic , not everywhere.
I do not see the need to insert " Abraham Lincoln was a human ..." into every biography.
That is the type of thing that is obvious and not helpful.
But for these topics which people other than mathematicians study we should respect a wider audience.
There are clearly reasonable cases and clearly reasonable cases (this is why I am not pushing the issue for math proof) where these things should be discussed: set, theorem, and really only a few more.
I hope you think about what I have said, and as a matter of conscience relent in the view that we can never never never talk about this abstract distracting stuff.
I'm serious.
There are some people are looking for exactly this kind of stuff when they are looking at these articles.
You are denying them.
It's really pretty little to ask in the scheme of things.
By the way, if we explore this whole "distracting" justification critically, we find that it really isn't a very good principle for our editing.
Clarify, don't duck your head in the sand.
My goodness.
Be well, Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 08:11, 12 May 2008 (UTC)  Gregbard, you said "It is that abstraction that manifests in natural or formal language.
".
I'm sure that a more common viewpoint among mathematicians is that the proof "is" the natural language expression, not an abstract idea behind that expression.
Mathematicians use the word "same" to indicate lots of equivalence relations.
I'm certain people have written a lot about the nature of mathematical proof (although I know of only a little bit of their work).
Are you taking your ideas here from a published source?
I'd be glad to look through it to get a sense of what's going on.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 11:55, 12 May 2008 (UTC)   I'm going to have to look for some sources.
What you say may be ture.
However, if mathematicians generally believe that the proof, or the set or the theorem is the chalk on the board, then all of the logical consequences of that belief go along with it.
Really we have identified a misimpression which could stand some clarification.
You will find in general that my edits seek to clarify.
One can express sets theorems and proofs in all kinds of languages, however we still say it is the same theorem, etc.
To some it may seem a silly point, whereas other study this aspect of it specifically.
Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 00:57, 14 May 2008 (UTC)  There are lots of equivalence relations that people describe as "same".
In the most literal, intensional sense, a proof is not the "same" proof when translated into a different natural language.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 01:00, 14 May 2008 (UTC)  Carl, now we are just fudging on what it means to be the same.
Please (all I can do is beg at this point), let me correct you.
First of all a lot of people don't use the word "literally" correctly.
Literally speaking, they are the same proof (a proof of the validity of modus ponens for instance), and it is only the tokens (the French, American, natural deduction method, and axiomatic versions) of it that are different.
This distinction, I believe is well known, and accepted.
If you and others have have a hard time accepting this, then it really proves my point that this kind of material needs to be covered.
Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 23:10, 15 May 2008 (UTC)  Relation to formal proof  If a mathematical proof is not a type of formal proof, but rather are usually informal, would it not at least be appropriate to say that they intend to mirror some formal proof, even if they are not themselves fully rigorous or formalized the same way.
Perhaps the last sentence of the lead paragraph can explicate the proper relationship?
Pontiff Greg Bard ( talk ) 23:22, 15 May 2008 (UTC)   Removed nonsense  I have removed the following nonsense, added twice by an anonymous editor: Proof by intuitive lemma  Main article: Proof by intuitive lemma  Often problems of mathematical proof can be reduced to a much simpler form by merely considering an appropriate lemma.
For example, to prove that π is irrational you could start by assuming the obvious result, "π 2 is irrational".
Then the result follows.
This is incorrect because the result "π 2 is irrational" is clearly not obvious - otherwise the irrationality of π would have been proved in antiquity, not in the 18th century.
The term "Proof by intuitive lemma" is not notable.
And the red-link also indicates that this is not a serious contribution.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 15:23, 27 May 2008 (UTC)   I agree with you entirely, both about the irrationality of π 2 not being obvious, and that that added text is not helpful.
I'm going to remind the IP editor to avoid edit warring, and remove the text again.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 15:36, 27 May 2008 (UTC)  Thank you for your help :) Gandalf61 ( talk ) 15:42, 27 May 2008 (UTC)  Proofs in general on the internet  It seems to me that often their are many mathematical proofs which are not on the internet, or when they can be found are haphazardly located in unrelated topic web pages.
It would be nice to have a mathematical proofs wiki, where people can add as many alternative methods for proving a given thing as seem generally distinct.
Often wikipedia doesn't provide  proofs at all.
I think the trick would be to have links to  proofs through category headings like linear algebra --> matrices --> invertible matrices equivalence statement proofs.
--> just found out that there is such a thing called plantmath, will add a link --> wrote a small description of planetmath and wikiproof.
—Preceding unsigned comment added by 220.233.197.84 ( talk ) 20:31, 16 August 2008 (UTC)   Sorry, but I removed your descriptions - including these sites under external links is fine, but writing descriptions of them here gives them undue weight and looks like advertising.
Planetmath has an article in its own right, and the other site could have its own article too as long as it is notable enough.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) Etymology  1.
On introducing Shakespeare's, Macbeth, Macbeth rode out upon the "heath" (a plane), "line" against line (a line of Kerns, a military line of men) , "point against point" (a point is a spear or javelin) , "lapp'd  in proof ".
An emeritus Shakespeare scholar at UCLA claimed Shakespeare was talking about geometry, and the metaphor was armor against the false, developed further in the story.
Does anyone have anything to contribute as a section of this article regarding the etymology or early history of "proof", armour against false propositions, other than use in law?
2.
Hacking discusses "probity" in relation to "probability", with ironic etymology.
But more interesting is that "probity" comes from God without empirical test, like proofs were once thought to.
Does anyone know more about this relationship?
The parallel would agrue against coincidence.
I included this fact in the article without stating the inference from the fact.
Tautologist ( talk ) 19:48, 3 October 2008 (UTC)  I am suspicious of the etymology in the article.
Hacking does not seem to derive the word from probare , although he does refer to the meaning of test .
We need a lexicographical citation.
I don't find it in the OED or Chambers for Mathematical proof.
Myrvin ( talk ) 10:52, 12 July 2009 (UTC)   Websters 1913 edition has same etymology.
as does the The Century Dictionary, 1911.
 and wikitionary wikt:proof .-- Salix ( talk ): 17:58, 12 July 2009 (UTC)   Yes I also found it in the New Shorter OED.
I'll cite that since its new.
I wonder why the OED doen't - maybe I misread it.
Myrvin ( talk ) 21:02, 12 July 2009 (UTC)  "Statistical proof" Section  There is an error in the deletion explanation, "Statistical proof" - already covered in "Probabilistic proof" , in the article edit history.
Therefore, I restored the "Statistical proof" section.
1.
Material in the "Statistical proof" section is not contained in  the "Probabilistic proof" section.
More strongly, there is no overlap.
A probabilistic proof is nonconstructive.
Neither of the terms, "constructive" or "nonconstructive",  would be used to describe a statistical proof.
(A “proof in statistics” might or might not be a “probabilistic proof”, however, as explained in the deleted section, a “statistical proof” differs from a “proof in statistics”, the former being data analysis pertaining to data, the later to mathematics pertaining to variables abstractly representing data.)
3.
The two kinds of proof do not use “proof” with the same meaning.
As explained in the deleted section, "statistical proof" has two meanings, and both are different from "proof in statistics".
Both meanings are very different from "probabilistic proof", which may or may not be a kind of "proof in statistics", but never a “statistical proof”.
4.
A statistical proof produces statements like “OK, you can sell this drug in the US, having established a p value less than .05”.
A probabilistic proof is a method of proof to conclude things like, “if there is such and such kind or graph, then a so and so kind of subgraph exists”.
A "statistical proof" is either the mass of deduction and methods used to arrive at a probability statement about specific “data”, or an evaluation of that statement, as more fully explained in the deleted section.
A Statistical proof produces conclusions like “Cigarettes are associated with cancer in this way, based on this data.”  5.
A probabilistic proof is a method of proving existence theorems, which does not construct the thing proved to exist.
For example, suppose you can prove the Expectation of something is less than 0, then you have proved that there exists an element less than 0.
Probabilistic proof has more meaningful and classic examples.
6.
The two kinds of proof are related only in a relation of two terms in their titles , i.e., statistics is related to probability theory in that the former is used to prove theorems in the latter.
However, a "probabilistic proof" could never be called a "statistical proof", nor vice versa.
A "proof in statistics" may, however, use a "probabilistic proof", to establish existence.
However, a "proof in statistics" differs from a "statistical proof", as explained in the deleted section.
The two sections, "probabilistic proof" and "statistical proof" should not appear next to each other to avoid confusion because of apparent relation through terms in their titles.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 01:16, 21 September 2008 (UTC)  If I understand you correctly, what you are calling a "statistical proof" is actually a statistical test - a method of reaching statistical conclusions (such as "cigarettes are associated with cancer" or "x is true with a probability of greater than 99%") using experimental data.
I don't believe any mathematician would call a statistical test a proof , and it is confusing to include them in this article, which focusses on mathematical methods of proof.
If this is just your own usage of the term "statistical proof" then it is original research , and should be removed from the article.
To show that this section is not original research, you need to provide a reliable source that uses the term "statistical proof" with the meaning that you have assigned to it.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 08:30, 21 September 2008 (UTC)  Re your first sentence, agreded as to "proof" in mathematics (I used to be a probabilist, and I would never call a "statistical proof" a "proof" in a talk in a math department, though "proofs" in the latter usage may occur in the former, if you read and track down all the footnotes).
A "statistical test", may or may not be part of a statistical proof.
"Staistical Test" has, over time, become a technical expression referring to the Neyman-Person classical theoretical framework, further put in a desicion theoretic framework as in, e.g., T.
Ferguson's text.
With the advent of computers and the subsequent ability to use nonparametric methods, this classic "statistical test" framework is used less in "statistical proofs".
(See B.
Efron's Scientific American article predicting this would occur.)
An example of a "statistical proof" without a "statistical test" was the establishment of menstural synchrony using data from sororities, done by the former director of the Center for Research on Women at Stanford, which used a circular distance measure (akin but not identical to reasoning in group theory), but contained no formal "statistical test", (e.g., independence assumptions could not be established).
"Statistical proofs" can have dazzling complexity, and debatable methodology, (while lacking in mathematical "depth", as I use the term), as in the current "factors in autism" debates.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 17:29, 21 September 2008 (UTC)  All irrelevant.
Provide a reliable source that uses "statistical proof" with the meaning that you have assigned to it.
If you cannot, I will remove your mini-essay again, on the grounds that it is original research.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 18:24, 21 September 2008 (UTC)  Re "reliable source that uses "statistical proof" with the meaning that I have assigned to it" 1 I have addressed your initial deletion reason, by demonstrating that a "statistical proof" is unrelated to a "probabilistic proof".)
2 I have addressed your next objection that "proof" is used, sometimes but not always, differently from "statistical proof.
3 I address your "statistical test" objection with a number of sourced examples below, not using a "statistical test".
(The random number generation and number theory example below is unrelated to test, both uses are consistent with the deleted section, fully  dispositive by themselves, but are a minority use for a more restricted definition of statistical proof.)
4 Here are some diverse uses of “statistical proof”, all sourced, all but one in conventional academic contexts, and all consistent with the deleted section.
(I note that none of the other sections are sourced, but this one will be in excess.)
None but one of the following uses of “statistical proof” uses a “statistical test”, but all are consistent with the deleted article section.
In only one use below, a statistical proof is a “proof” in mathematics, but it is not a “test”.
---  Diverse reliable source, all that use "statistical proof" consistent with the meaning in deleted section - Physics context –“ the Large Hadron Collider could start to indicate exotic new things like the Higgs boson within months - though it could take a year or two to have the statistical proof needed to confirm its presence”   Sports context – “Southern Cal’s defensive line dominated Ohio State last weekend.
Here’s statistical proof ”  ;  ; Stein's paradox in statistics, Bradley Efron, SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN 236: 119 (1977)  Pharmeceutical industry context – “supported by statistical proof both from the providers”   Educational policy context – “I don’t have any statistical proof of this, but I firmly believe that cheating and plagiarism have increased in recent years,” Brown, who is the history department chair, said”   Marketing context – “based on clear statistical proof about which combination of design works most successfully in converting sales and delivering customers”   Cryptography, number theory, chaotic series, random number generation, etc.
pure mathematics context – “a statistical proof can just mean ‘most’ cases, which may mean that some cases which fit under the guarantee are not really secure”  , “in number theory and commutative algebra...
in particular the statistical proof of the lemma.”  , “Whether constant π (i.e., pi) is normal is a confusing problem without any strict theoretical demonstration except for some statistical proof” (This is a derogatory use, but still goes under this bulletin heading as pertaining to a chaotic series, and it does not use “statistical test” in the use of the Wiki article.)
,  “these observations suggest a statistical proof of Goldbach's conjecture with very quickly vanishing probability of failure for large E”   IT context use – “Maxymiser's technology allows them to test different approaches to content and provides clear statistical proof of what works   Bayesian analysis context – “(I leave this citation to someone else, but the article section is at least consistent with some Bayesian uses.
)”  Politics context – “Evolution got a cameo role in Philippine politics a few days back … alleged statistical proof of his invincibility.
De Castro may wilt in presidential debates”   Classical testing context – “(insert any textbook cite over twenty years old containing ‘statistical test’, here)”  Medical practitioner context – “all doctors can do is to point that scientifically, there is no statistical proof ”   Economic context – “Claiming they have ‘solid, statistical proof’ the two say that data actually suggests the economy is not heading into a recession””   Despite the wide, consistent, but not well-defined usages, except for non-comprehensive isolated articles, like I.
J.
Good’s exposition  , which is antiquated, hyper-classical, pre-computer methods, anti- free wheeling data analysis, and parametric assumption laden, there is no “collected uses” literature.
Further, none but two of the above quoted usages are consistent with Good’s discussion.
One reason for absence of a “collected uses” is disdain for data analysis by “real” mathematician, Bayesian vs.
NonBayesian encampments, and most importantly, if a student inquires into the history of statistics, there is usually a shudder and change of topic, in recollection of the Galton then Hitler path, or the overt racism of Fisher and his circle.
PS, just a guess, but if we actually know each other, and this is another clean the Augean Stables practical joke, I remind you of my last repartee to such a joke, my for the moment repartee is that looking at sources for all these uses, all over the map, has been fun.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 21:12, 21 September 2008 (UTC)   Thank you for the references.
FYI, in-line citations don't work well in talk pages, as there is no sensible place to put the <references/> tag (which you omitted anyway), so I have converted your in-line citations to external links for clarity.
I will add one or two of the more useful references to the article.
I will also attempt to simplify and clarify your rather opaque style - this article is meant to be an overview article linking to more detaild articles, and the "Statistical proof" section is, at present, far too long.
As regards your strange remarks about a "practical joke" and your "last repartee", they make even less sense to me than the rest of your writing, but I suggest you review WP:AGF before throwing out accusations and veiled threats at other editors.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 08:37, 22 September 2008 (UTC)  One more, I happened to have been reading The Singularity is Near , and on returning to it after writing this, I noticed that it is chalk full (especially for a popular science book; recall hawking's remark that sales are halved for each included equation) of scatter plots of logarithms) of scatter plots as statistical proofs.
These might be the most common of all.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 22:44, 21 September 2008 (UTC)  Throw that book in the bin right now!
Its a great big bunch of hokum.
Rays central argument falls apart if you recalculate the graphs assuming we are 1000 years in the future, the log-log plots would look almost identical pointing to a singularity at which ever point to calculate from.
-- Salix alba ( talk ) 23:21, 21 September 2008 (UTC)   Ha, I guess they weren't very good "visual statistical proofs" then, eh?
I am reading his book on an Amazon Kindle, which does not yet have readable pictures.
So I not only can't see the scatter plots, I can't throw the book in the bin ' either .
Still, it should be an interesting next thirty years.
All of us have singularities that are near, as we all gotta go sometime.
Gotta go.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 23:29, 21 September 2008 (UTC)  Comment - After perusing several shelves of Statistics texts, and poring over the net, I have found that, interestingly, the expression “statistical proof”, appears to be used in almost every field ...
from Number theory to Baseball .
Every field, that is, with the exception of Statistics !
!
EricDiesel ( talk ) 19:06, 22 September 2008 (UTC)  .
I added bullet points to different inconsitent uses of "statistical proof", clarified when it is a mathematical proof and when it is not, and referenced sources using the expression.
But Gandalf61 's comment that this section is too long has not been adequately addressed.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 16:21, 23 September 2008 (UTC)   (Thread moved from other talk page.)
Please can I ask you yo stop writing your mini-essays in the mathematical proof article.
That article is meant to be an overview article that provides a summary of the topic and links to more detailed articles.
Your essays are by far the longest sections in the article, and they are making it unbalanced and unreadable.
If you think we should have an article about all the different uses of the term statistical proof, for example, then by all means start a statistical proof article.
But please, please stop overloading the mathematical proof article.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 16:13, 23 September 2008 (UTC)   Recall that your original objection and deletion of the entire section was that "'statistical proof' is covered in the 'probabilistic proof' section."
The first contribution I put in was short and consistent with all of the bullet points, but you correctly objected that my formulation would be "original research".
I have been working up a Statistical proof article for the past couple of days to lin to.
I have tried to address all of your concerns in a systematic manner, but the latest is not specific enough, except for a legitimate length objection.
but I can not figure out which information to delete without deleting essential distinctions, so please specify which information does not belong here, if it is clear to you.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 16:38, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  User:Gandalf61 , how does the final version look for brevity and comprehinsiveness?
(Might even be donwnright elegant if it was not utterly lacking in depth ?)
EricDiesel ( talk ) 17:50, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  Fractal theory (and Experimental Mathemaatics)  I removed a claim that fractal theory developed without proofs.
To the extent that fractal theory is a subfield of dynamical systems, formal proofs are employed.
For example, Lyapunov exponents and Hausdorff dimension are formalized to the usual standard of mathematical rigor.
— Carl ( CBM • talk ) 14:16, 22 September 2008 (UTC)   That's why I put the "citation needed" tag.
Mandelbrot was my best friend's uncle when I was a mid teen, and a dinner table "fact" was that he was having problems with others who were asserting he was not really doing mathematics, in that he was developing pictures and not proving theorems.
I also read something similar regarding the history of fractals using some kind of non rigorous method, different from the conventional theorem-proof framework, with some examples to understand what was meant, but which I can not recall.
I also recall, as a beginning grad student, meeting another grad student in physics at a film, who said he was working with fractals, then having my hands slapped when I expressed an interest in fractals, being told "that's not really mathematics, its just a way of making pictures".
There may still be a grain of truth in the deleted claim, and I will try to track it down with a source.
I presume that the purpose of the "citation needed" tag is a request to others to fact check an questionable assertion, so let me know if I am using it incorrectly.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 14:26, 22 September 2008 (UTC)  No, what you did is perfectly fine.
I do it myself, if there is something that I believe to be true but don't have a good reference for (but only very occasionally).
Of course, if someone else disagrees, they may remove it and leave their concerns on the talk page, which is what I did.
In this case, the issue may be the wording.
The only things I know about the early development of chaos theory I learned from the Chaos book, which I read too long ago.
I also have the impression that Mandelbrot did quite a bit of experimental work before he and other mathematicians could prove rigorous results.
But I don't think that's the same as saying the fractal theory developed "without proofs".
For example, I looked through Mandelbrot's publications on Mathscinet, and MR0719054 caught my eye.
It is for a 1983 paper where Mandelbrot uses illustrations to discuss conjectures on the Mandelbrot set - but the reviewer points to papers in 1982 by Douady/Hubbard and Ruelle covering similar topics in a rigorous way.
So while Mandelbrot might not have always used proofs, other mathematicians were studying the same topics rigorously at the same time.
— Carl ( CBM • talk ) 14:53, 22 September 2008 (UTC)  My knowledge of Mandelbrot comes from mid 1970's family dinners.
I was a run away, and usually ate dinner at his nephew's home.
In the later 70-s or early 80's, in the math department at UCLA, I brought up the fantastic pictures and his Fractal Geometry of Nature book, which I was unable to read, to my runaway-kid-math-mentor, Ernst Strauss , a geometer.
He said it was not mathematics, "just pictures".
This remark was repeated by Kai Lai Chung in 1982, who terrified me and made me feel dumb for even bringing it up.
(Chung was the guy who boasted of a "perfect", "elementary" probability text, having eliminated all pictures, an attitude the opposite of the computere driven, data analytic oriented, Statistics department next door.
Chung was also very nasty to grad students (and others), deriding their work as "trivial", making one of the very smartest grad students (much smarter than me) cry and leave the department.
Following this, I did some stuff Chung liked, Chung asked me to be his student following that, and I told him, no, as I could only think in pictures, and he was not doing anything interesting anyway.
Interestingly though, we ended up friends, shared a friendship with Alonzo Church, and Chung had great Church stories from Princeton, where Chung was a student of Church in some courses, when church was very young, and had the same beautiful and bizzare idiosynchratic personality traits he had in old age.)
Ok, back to the issue.
I was abuot to suggest a "terminology" change too, as mandelbrot's fractals have been embeded in the very rigor he rebelled against.
Perhaps a better expression would be "fractal geeometry for Mandelbrot", for the following reasons.
- Regarding “just making pictures” and calling the activity “doing mathematics”, “Mandelbrot, working at the IBM Research Laboratory, did some computer simulations for these sets on the reasonable assumption that, if you wanted to prove something, it might be helpful to know the answer ahead of time.”  A sort of exploratory mathematics, cf.
exploratory data analysis, derided only twenty years ago.
Here is one comment regarding Mandelbrot and “proof” of theorems, “… brought home again to Benoit  that there was a ‘mathematics of the eye’, that visualization of a problem was as valid a method as any for finding a solution.
Amazingly, he found himself alone with this conjecture.
The teaching of mathematics in France was dominated by a handful of dogmatic mathematicians hiding behind the pseudonym ‘Bourabki’… ”  Of course, this quote is from what is essentially a comic book, but this only makes the very point of the “conjecture” Mandelbrot was said to be making!.
The irony of the context of the quoted passage has the elements of a political cartoon.
One last thing (Joe Biden look out, for long-windedness competition), as you probably inferred by now, I am a picture person, and unfamiliar with the theory of fractal geometry beyond a very cursory knowledge, although people are deceived into thinking the opposite as I can talk on and on for hours on the subject in my lectures during ecology field trips.
I can only understand a proof and remember it if I can draw a picture of the content.
I was just utterly humiliated (my favorite emotion) for this by my new friend, User:Stan Shebs .
I was invited to contribute to the Wiki plant-pages.
I was referred to User:Stan Shebs as fellow desert enthusiast (finatic, in my case).
When I saw his personal photo on his user page, I thought I could boast by pinpointing the exact location, date, and time, of the photo, all from the coloration of the plants in the photo's distant background.
He responded something like, “very close, but it says where and when the picture was taken in the text below the picture”!
(I consider humiliation, along with eavesdropping and plagiarism, to be the highest form of flattery, so fear not in pointing out errors in my contributions, but supplement your criticism with a picture so I can understand it.)
EricDiesel ( talk ) 18:08, 22 September 2008 (UTC)  I think that, rather than making claims about fractal geometry itself, it may be better to just mention people, such as Mandelbrot of Doron Zeilberger.
There are some things that can be said about the contemporary "experimental math" movement, although it does not seem to be gaining much ground among mathematicians overall.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 19:00, 22 September 2008 (UTC)   See Experimental mathematics .
Indra's Pearls (book) is a fine example.
In that David Mumford discusses various investigations, and comments that much of the work could not be published as journals only accepted theorems.
What to do with the pictures?
Two thoughts surfaced: the first was that they were unpublishable in the standard way, there were no theorems only very suggestive pictures.
They furnished convincing evidence for many conjectures and lures to further exploration, but theorems were coins of the realm ant the conventions of that day dictated that journals only published theorems" Indra's Pearls p.
viii.
-- Salix alba ( talk ) 19:33, 22 September 2008 (UTC)  This whole "Mathematics without proofs" section does not belong in an article about mathematical proofs .
It is a poorly written mini-essay, unencyclopedic in style and POV.
I propose it should be removed.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 23:27, 22 September 2008 (UTC)   Ok to remove.
I will rewrite with just one or two sentences (or you can sum it down).
I was just trying to be responsive to carl, and including quotes to avoid source onjections that I have seen in other articles.
I am new to Wikipedia, wrote my first articles on Palin's churches and Pastors, and am noticing wildly divergent standards in the different article topics.
Your rewording of statistical proof is nice and short and easy to read.
It misses a couple of things, but a sentence or two will fix it.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 00:07, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  Missing content  There are several things that I think this article is missing: The role of mathematical proof in contemporary mathematics  The tension between natural language proofs and formal proofs  The much-discussed status of proofs that are too long or too esoteric to understand, including: the four-color theorem  Fermat's last theorem (isn't there stuff by vos Savant we could mention?)
the Poincare conjecture  The spectrum of meanings of "constructive proof"  The "experimental mathematics" program The first four of these ought to have sections; the last one maybe just a paragraph.
As it stands, the article is a good start, but it reflects a "Proof 101" viewpoint rather than the broader scholarly viewpoint.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 13:48, 23 September 2008 (UTC)   Seems good.
A sentence or two on Diagram chasing might no go amis.
-- Salix alba ( talk ) 14:27, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  We already have whole articles on most of those topics - see proof theory , formal proof , proof by exhaustion , constructive proof , experimental mathematics .
Although several over-long essay sections have recently been added, this article is meant to be an overview article that links to more specific articles.
We must be careful not to unnecessarily duplicate material that is already in the linked articles.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 14:46, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  We can certainly link to those articles (although I don't think e.g.
proof theory covers any of the points I mentioned), and write some things here in summary style.
From my point of view, this article is like a hypothetical article on derivatives that consists primarily of derivative rules rather than discussion of the overall concept of derivative.
It's a start, but doesn't give a good overall perspective on the concept of mathematical proof.
Anyway, if I have time to work on it, I'll try to add a little content so you can see what I'm thinking.
At 20k in length, this article is not at all too long at the moment.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 14:52, 23 September 2008 (UTC)  This overview article already contains links to most of those articles.
If you think that proof theory , for example, needs expanding then by all means add content in that article - but not here.
EricDiesel 's mini essays have already made this article unbalanced (I have asked him to put them somewhere else) and it is in danger of becoming completely unreadable.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 16:22, 23 September 2008 (UTC)   Now rewritten to remove "essay" quality, at least in "statistical proof" and "history" sections, and moved bulky stuff to links.
EricDiesel ( talk ) I do agree the article has readability problems; I think that some rearranging of topics will help with that.
It will be a little while before I can work on this one, but I think the topic is sufficiently important to warrant a slightly deeper analysis than this version (for example) provides.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 16:31, 23 September 2008 (UTC)   deeper topic "Proof 201" stuff should go at end, after "Proof 101" and not early on, then 301 depth in pages of the links, and 401 in the linked pages as references articles.
4-Color fits illustratively in all of "exhaustion", "computers", and "aesthetics" sections.
Article sections best proceed from a dictionary like section ("Proof 001") - then to general ecyclopedia stuff ideas and history-  then to specialized encyclopedia content ("Proof 201") with links, else general users will give up at the beginning without finding what they came for.
"Experimental" rewritten per your previous comments and Ganalf61's, but still needs revision.
More is needed on "history" re rigor, esp late 19th early 20th stuff in general history section.
EricDiesel ( talk ) 19:50, 23 September 2008 (UTC)   User:Carl wrote that the article looks like “Proof 101”.
Is that a dyslectic successor of 100 Proof ?
Tautologist ( talk ) 23:30, 25 September 2008 (UTC)   But seriously, the current version, while not as pretty as Gandolf61’s terseity, serves as a quick reference by an undergrad given an exercise to do both a “probabilistic proof” and a “constructive proof” of something, just what an encyclopedia is for.
It’s also good as a survey of conversational use.
But, I came across this article following links, after a referral from User:Katzman , and would like to see a general, readable not terse, but short expositions of the stuff Carl is talking about, just out of curiosity.
People don't generally invent a formal system until they figure out a proof that everything provable in that system is true.
For any formal system, it's possible for somebody to think of a way to count all algorithms that can be proven in that system to generate a number.
Using Cantor's diagonal argument, you can find an algorithm that generates a number that none of those algorithms generate.
Although you can't prove in that system that that algorithm generates a number, you know it's true, which means a proof for it exists and therefore a proof is an abstract object.
Blackbombchu ( talk ) 01:37, 13 June 2015 (UTC)  Computer proofs  Gandalf61 rewrite is a big improvement on my original scribbled note jot (my other edits could be similarly improved).
Maybe append clause on loss of apriori certainty, re "math is not empirical", and related debates, e.g., post- computational neuroscience "neo-psychologism" as to certainty never being there in the first place, written with spin of new functionalist phil of mind perspective, etc.
Also maybe could be added semi-technical brief sentence or two explaining foundatoin theory tranlation of proofs via to symbolic proof structures allowing computers are able to "think" and "prove" things, without reader having headache of linking to main article; this would both preserve mathematical appearance of article in methods section and clarify things w/o tracking down via link.
Tautologist ( talk ) 17:05, 27 September 2008 (UTC)  Since i already ruined the conciseness of this article, we might as well print out the 4 "color" proof to give the reader the "flavor" Tautologist ( talk ) 20:29, 29 September 2008 (UTC)  statistical proof - "Homelessness" not dealt with in this election cycle  Some Homeless (proofs) are subjects of derision by all- In recent math journal article- "There is only a statistical proof of this."
From Wiki Statistics article "edit summary" for reason to delete brief mention of same "only a statistical proof" from Wiki Statistics article - " (→Use of Statistical Methods Outside the Framework of Inference: Remove sections - these refers to uses of mathematics, not statistics) " Oh, well.
Tautologist ( talk ) 19:56, 27 September 2008 (UTC)   Edit on 2008-10-5  I edited and rearranged a lot of content today.
I started a section on "nature and purpose" of mathematical proof, although it's only a stub right now.
There are still many topics the article doesn't discuss, or only mentions in passing: The role of mathematical proof in mathematics  The concept of proof in intuitionistic mathematics; link to the article on the foundational debates of the 1920s.
Proof in mathematics education, esp.
at the pre-college level.
Historical development  The New Math movement  The recent NCTM recommendations By the way, does anyone mind if I clean up the references to be like the ones in Group (mathematics) or the ones in Mathematical logic ?
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 21:09, 5 October 2008 (UTC)   More source stuff - FYI all, Steven Krantz at Washington in St Lous has a new book in draft, The Proof is in the Pudding, A Look at the Changing Nature of Mathematical Proof .
More possible section topics - In Time Love Memory (about the fly-room "dirt-under-the fingernails" molecular bio crowd at Ctech, Jonathan Wiener talks about an "association" gene (a la Hume induction).
Recent dinner talk with the same crowd there indicates there may be a "proof" gene about to be inferred (circularly using proof concepts for the tools to make the inferences, of course).
Lots of (perhaps justified) hyper-psychologism from molec bio and neuroscience recent events, too.
Tautologist ( talk ) 00:40, 6 October 2008 (UTC)  My take on Quine, from Two Dogmas and later, is very different than User:Carl 's (else what does "two", "dogmas" and "empiricism" mean in the title?
Also "web" of belief for Q, and of associations in neurosci, contradicts) The new sentence sounds more like a description of Frege than Quine on this.
Tautologist ( talk ) 01:04, 6 October 2008 (UTC)  The sentence using Quine as a source for the claim that mathematical proofs are analytic was already there, worded slightly differently.
Thanks for pointing it out, though.
That paragraph (the whole section, really) is pretty vague at the moment.
I commented out the Quine sentence for now.
My thought is that some of the references from the history section of Tautology (logic) may apply here as well.
By the way, my user name is CBM; User:Carl is someone else.
My real name is Carl, though.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 01:19, 6 October 2008 (UTC)  Rigor's role, communicating proofs, purpose of formal proofs  The article says a proof is "a convincing demonstration (within the accepted standards of the field) that some mathematical statement is necessarily true".
I think few mathematicians would recognize this as a description of proof.
Eric Weisstein's "A rigorous mathematical argument which unequivocally demonstrates the truth of a given proposition" (on MathWorld, http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Proof.html ) is much closer to the mark.
The fact that a proof is rigorous is key to the concept of mathematical proof and is a distinguishing feature of mathematics.
The text in a math book or math journal labeled "proof" is intended to convey or communicate the existence of a proof to the reader.
The proof itself is better thought of as existing in the minds of the author and reader.
The author checks that there is a rigorous proof by checking that each step logically follows from those that come before and filling in all details needed to verify this.
However, the author doesn't include all these details in what they write.
Instead, they decide how best to communicate this structure to a reader who has the background and knowledge that they are assuming for their readers.
The reader, when reading the proof, is expected to check that a rigorous proof exists by checking that each step logically follows from those that come before and by filling in all details needed to verify this.
This underlying logical structure/scaffolding actually permeates a math book or journal article.
Every sentence or group of sentences in a math book/article can be classified as a definition, theorem, proof, or remark.
(Some sentences might have elements of more than one of these categories.)
Math books/articles try to guide the reader by providing explicit labels, e.g., "Theorem", "Proof", for the more important or lengthier such items.
However, it is expected that the reader will figure out the function of the unlabeled parts by their content.
One convention that helps the reader is that sentences containing a word or phrase in italics are definitions of the italicized word or phrase (some authors use bold).
If a sentence in an unlabeled part is functioning as part of a proof, the reader is expected to check that the proof is correct/rigorous.
For some declarative sentences, the author may not give any justification.
For these mini theorems, the reader is expected to provide the proof without help from the author.
When I first realized, in talking with colleagues who were not mathematicians, that most non-mathematicians are unaware of this structure in math books/articles, I was rather surprised.
To understand the relationship between mathematical proofs and formal proofs, it helps to understand the purpose of the latter.
One purpose of formal logical systems and formal proofs is as a mathematical model of mathematics and mathematical proof.
This mathematical model allows the mathematical study of mathematics.
For this purpose it is important that a formal proof capture the key features of a mathematical proof.
However, as with any mathematical model, the model is not the object.
A formal proof is a mathematical proof, but most mathematical proofs are not formal proofs.
Another purpose of formal logical systems is to provide a foundation for mathematics.
For example, ZFC is an adequate foundation for almost all of modern mathematics.
When used for this purpose, it suffices to prove that the mathematics in question could be translated into ZFC.
It isn't necessary to actually do the translation.
Of course, the proof that such a translation could be done is a mathematical proof.
-- David Marcus ( talk ) 19:55, 24 December 2008 (UTC)   Two-column proof  This is not distinct from a direct proof.
Any reason not to remove it from the article?
Bongo matic 13:28, 24 March 2009 (UTC)   These particular types of direct proofs are very commonly taught in grade school in the U.S., to the point where many students immediately think of a two-column proof when the hear the word "proof", instead of thinking of the natural-language proofs that mathematicians would think of.
So I think that these are of enough interest to the general reader to include (because they may well wonder why the thing that they learned to call a "proof" is not included).
There are several other sections in the article about types of direct proofs: elementary proofs, combinatorial proofs, etc.
Pretty much every type of proof listed in the "Proof methods" section is a direct proof.
Maybe this could be clarified some.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 14:02, 24 March 2009 (UTC)  I don't understand the words: "(or sometimes just called reasons)".
What are called reasons?
The lines?
Myrvin ( talk ) 09:03, 15 October 2009 (UTC)   It just means that the right-hand column in a two column proof is often headed "Reasons".
I have rewritten that section of the article to make it clearer.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 09:28, 15 October 2009 (UTC)  Very messy!
As a student of mathematics having assisted with proofs classes, I believe this article is dismally organized.
As a summary of the concept of mathematical proofs, it reads fairly well in sections (1) and (2), but section (3) on the methods of proof (which is probably the most important section to someone looking for specific information) is a mess.
The main categories of proof techniques are lumped right in with subcategories, field-specific techniques, and several that are not methods of proof at all such as "visual proofs" and computer-assisted proofs (i.e., demonstrations and tools).
First of all, the techniques listed can at least be divided into direct proofs, proofs by contrapositive (or transposition), and proofs by contradiction.
Arguably, existence proofs and proofs by induction could also be top-level divisions.
More specific proof categories such as combinatorial proofs - which may themselves refer to several different methods of proof - could be listed in a final, separate sub-section.
Secondly, the two mentioned earlier, visual proofs and computer-assisted proofs, should probably be presented in an "Other" section with a header explaining that they are not, themselves, proof techniques.
The latter would be a tool for proving by cases, which is a type of direct proof.
I do not pretend to have the supreme layout which will present the material most clearly to all audiences - I just think it needs to be done much, much better than it has been.
I've given a few ideas already.
Does any disagree or have other ideas for organizing the "Methods of proof" section?
Kiyura ( talk ) 03:36, 2 May 2009 (UTC)   Well then, since no one has anything at all to say, I'll take it upon myself.
I will post a major revision of the article, both content and organization, on my user page by this Friday May 22.
If there are still no comments, I will apply the revision on June 1.
Kiyura ( talk ) 15:18, 19 May 2009 (UTC)   Sounds good to me.
— Carl ( CBM · talk ) 15:23, 19 May 2009 (UTC)   When you have it up (I assume in a sub-page), can you please post a notification and wikilink here?
Bongo matic 16:23, 19 May 2009 (UTC)  I have finished my initial revision, here it is: User:Kiyura/Mathematical_Proof .
Please see the associated Talk page as well.
Since you two, at least, have replied (thank you), I will not apply anything to the main article until some consensus is reached.
Kiyura ( talk ) 20:13, 23 May 2009 (UTC)  I'm also interested in this new revision - see my comments on your talk page.
-- Joth ( talk ) 09:27, 1 June 2009 (UTC)   Buss  The reference for Buss, 1997 is missing.
What is the publication?
Myrvin ( talk ) 11:20, 12 July 2009 (UTC)   I think it must be Samuel R.
Buss.
His website only lists four 1997 publications, none of which seems promising: http://www.math.ucsd.edu/~sbuss/ResearchWeb/index.html .
I think that that reference should be cut or improved.
Colin Rowat ( talk ) 18:35, 22 December 2015 (UTC)   The year is wrong; I've found a 1998 book that matches the claim and page number.
I'll use it to fix the reference.
— David Eppstein ( talk ) 18:55, 22 December 2015 (UTC)  Misuse of sources  Jagged 85 ( talk  ·  contribs ) is one of the main contributors to Wikipedia (over 67,000 edits; he's ranked 198 in the number of edits ), and practically all of his edits have to do with Islamic science, technology and philosophy.
This editor has persistently misused sources here over several years .
This editor's contributions are always well provided with citations, but examination of these sources often reveals either a blatant misrepresentation of those sources or a selective interpretation, going beyond any reasonable interpretation of the authors' intent.
Please see: Wikipedia:Requests for comment/Jagged 85 .
I searched the page history, and found 5 edits by Jagged 85 in March 2010 .
Tobby72 ( talk ) 14:03, 13 June 2010 (UTC)   Fixed.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 15:36, 13 June 2010 (UTC)  Statistical proof  I recently came across the article on statistical proof .
When when I first arrived at the page  - it was a mess.
There is a bit of debate going on in the discussion page on the merit of statistical proof having its own page and even if such a thing exists.
There are obvious logical ties to mathematical proof, so I thought I would come here and ask others who know about mathematical proof to share their thoughts.
Is statistical proof distinct from a mathematical proof?
Is this something that could turn into a small section or Wikilink in this article?
Thought I would raise the issue and see what comes of it.
Thanks.
Thompsma ( talk ) 21:25, 11 November 2011 (UTC)   Euclid and Indirect Proof  First, many apologies.
I know I typed something like this when I made a small change a few days ago.
Somehow it did not remain so I am typing this first.
I have no interest in a reversion conflict.
Just wanted to make a change and state the reason.
The change is to return a few sentences relating to "the first proof by contradiction" I have no opinion about the value one way or the other about these few sentences.
My problem is that they were removed with the total justification being something like "Euclid's proof of the infinitude of primes was the first proof by contradiction" (not a direct quote.)
As Wikipedia itself correctly says (Euclid's Proof) "Euclid is often erroneously reported to have proved this result by contradiction" (and other parts of Wikipedia do say that) That is based on the following common misconception that Euclid book IX prop 20 says something like Prop: There are infinitely many primes  1.
Suppose that there were finitely many and list them p1,p2,..pk 2.
Use the list to create the number P=p1*p2*...*pk+1 3.
There is a prime q dividing P (maybe q=P) and it is not in the list CONTRADICTION  It is true that the proof is nowadays often presented this way and that there are claims (including some parts of Wikipedia) that this is essentially what Euclid wrote.
However what was actually written was more like, there are always more primes (than in any finite list) Prop: No finite list of primes includes all primes  1.
Given a list p1,p2,..pk (here is how to get something else) 2.
Use the list to create the number P=(p1*p2*...*pk)+1 3.
There is a prime q dividing P (maybe q=P) and it is not in the list (there, something else) SO I am happy with some other reason to remove the claim I reverted, but not the given one.
Gentlemath ( talk ) 02:31, 16 February 2015 (UTC)   Induction and Deduction as methods of inference  Inductive inference and deductive inference are both regularly used in mathematical proof.
The article "Mathematical induction" declares the method of mathematical induction as deductive inference, but, it's inductive inference.
It neither clear nor unambiguous (nor non-controversial) to call "inductive inference" (exhaustive inductive inference, as of proof by induction) instead "deductive inference", because it's not.
It is clear and unambiguous that "exhaustive" deductive or inductive inference (i.e., covering all cases) does maintain derivability of conclusion from premise and otherwise maintains the grounds for mathematical proof.
It is very widely understood that "proof by induction" is "mathematical proof by mathematical induction" in any context of mathematical proof.
— Preceding unsigned comment added by 75.172.122.39 ( talk ) 07:10, 18 March 2017 (UTC)   This has that the disambiguation of mathematical inductive inference and the inference of reasonable expectations would go into the article on induction, to leave clearly in the main article of mathematical proof the deductive and mainly inductive inferential arguments as relevant to the derivability via inference of conclusion from premise.
"Induction inference of expectations" ("common sense") should be disambiguated from exhaustive "inductive inference by cases" (mathematical induction), instead of overloading the definition of deductive inference (the contrapositive, that syllogism is the inductive).
This involves a rather significant difference in definitions of overloaded primary terms.
External links modified  Hello fellow Wikipedians, I have just modified one external link on Mathematical proof .
Please take a moment to review my edit .
I made the following changes: Added archive https://web.archive.org/web/20090215114618/http://home.att.net/~fractalia/history.htm to http://home.att.net/~fractalia/history.htm When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.
This message was posted before February 2018.
After February 2018 , "External links modified" talk page sections are no longer generated or monitored by InternetArchiveBot .
No special action is required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification using the archive tool instructions below.
Editors have permission to delete these "External links modified" talk page sections if they want to de-clutter talk pages, but see the RfC before doing mass systematic removals.
This message is updated dynamically through the template {{ source check }}  (last update: 18 January 2022) .
If you have discovered URLs which were erroneously considered dead by the bot, you can report them with this tool .
If you found an error with any archives or the URLs themselves, you can fix them with this tool .
Cheers.— InternetArchiveBot  ( Report bug ) 23:51, 12 June 2017 (UTC)   "Story Proof" section needed?
From basic mathematical study I have come across the notion of story proofs.
Some are used in a book I am reading (Introduction to Probability by Blitzstein and Hwang).
It seems like its own category of proof, so perhaps a section should be added here, or a new Wikipedia page created.
I would do it, but I'm not confident enough in my mathematical knowledge to consider editing this page.
So I figured I would provide a suggestion instead.
Proxyma ( talk ) 23:44, 28 June 2017 (UTC)   I think as a minimum there would have to be references that showed the term "story proof" has a clear, widely understood meaning in the mathematical community, outside of this one text book.
I did a quick Google search, but the only links I could see refer to a book "Story Proof: The Science Behind the Startling Power of Story" by Kendall F.
Haven, which has nothing to do with mathematical proof.
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 08:52, 29 June 2017 (UTC)   Here at https://books.google.com/books?id=EvoYCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA19 there's some rather nice examples (and more in the book ), but if indeed this is the only book where it is mentioned, I don't think we should have it in our article—just per wp:primary source and wp:undue .
- DVdm ( talk ) 12:33, 29 June 2017 (UTC)   And I think the standard term for the type of proof described in that link is double counting .
Gandalf61 ( talk ) 15:49, 29 June 2017 (UTC)  I agree that it is odd that Google doesn't turn up much.
My impression was that "story proof" specifically referred to the English text accompanying the equation, and that the author basically meant "proving by providing an interpretation."
Here is how it is described in the book: A story proof is a proof by interpretation.
For counting problems, this often means counting the same thing in two different ways, rather than doing tedious algebra.
A story proof often avoids messy calculations and goes further than an algebraic proof toward explaining why the result is true.
The word “story” has several meanings, some more mathematical than others, but a story proof (in the sense in which we’re using the term) is a fully valid mathematical proof.
I am not super experienced in math, but I have definitely seen plenty of accompanying text to equations.
I think story proof is the author's attempt to give that a name.
I admit, though, that there's a significant overlap with double counting techniques in the story proofs I've seen so far.
Proxyma ( talk ) 00:14, 30 June 2017 (UTC)   Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Mathematical_proof&oldid=1212682135 " Page notice  You are not logged in.
Your IP address will be publicly visible if you make any edits.
If you log in or create an account , your edits will be attributed to a username, among other benefits .
Content that violates any copyrights will be deleted.
Encyclopedic content must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources .
Anti-spam check.
Do not fill this in!
{{Short description|Reasoning for mathematical statements}}
{{Use mdy dates|date=December 2022}}
], one of the oldest surviving fragments of ]'s '']'', a textbook used for millennia to teach proof-writing techniques.
The diagram accompanies Book II, Proposition 5.<ref>{{cite web
|url=http://www.math.ubc.ca/~cass/Euclid/papyrus/papyrus.html
|title=One of the Oldest Extant Diagrams from Euclid
|author=Bill Casselman
|author-link=Bill Casselman (mathematician)
|publisher=University of British Columbia
|access-date=September 26, 2008
}}</ref>]]
A '''mathematical proof''' is a ] ] for a ], showing that the stated assumptions ]ally guarantee the conclusion.
The argument may use other previously established statements, such as ]s; but every proof can, in principle, be constructed using only certain basic or original assumptions known as ]s,<ref>{{cite book |author1=Clapham, C.
 |author2=Nicholson, J.N.
|name-list-style=amp | title = The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Mathematics, Fourth edition |quote = A statement whose truth is either to be taken as self-evident or to be assumed.
Certain areas of mathematics involve choosing a set of axioms and discovering what results can be derived from them, providing proofs for the theorems that are obtained.
}}</ref><ref name="nutsandbolts">{{cite book|title=The Nuts and Bolts of Proofs: An Introduction to Mathematical Proofs |last=Cupillari |first=Antonella|author-link= Antonella Cupillari |edition=Third |year=2005 |orig-year=2001 |publisher=] |isbn=978-0-12-088509-1 |page=3}}</ref><ref>{{cite book|title=Discrete Mathematics with Proof |date=July 2009 |first=Eric |last=Gossett |page=86 |quote=Definition 3.1.
Proof: An Informal Definition |publisher=] |isbn=978-0470457931}}</ref> along with the accepted rules of ].
Proofs are examples of exhaustive ] which establish logical certainty, to be distinguished from ] arguments or non-exhaustive ] which establish "reasonable expectation".
Presenting many cases in which the statement holds is not enough for a proof, which must demonstrate that the statement is true in ''all'' possible cases.
A proposition that has not been proved but is believed to be true is known as a ], or a hypothesis if frequently used as an assumption for further mathematical work.
Proofs employ ] expressed in mathematical symbols, along with ] which usually admits some ambiguity.
In most mathematical literature, proofs are written in terms of ] ].
Purely ]s, written fully in ] without the involvement of natural language, are considered in ].
The distinction between ] has led to much examination of current and historical ], ], and so-called ], oral traditions in the mainstream mathematical community or in other cultures.
The ] is concerned with the role of language and logic in proofs, and ].
==History and etymology==
{{See also|History of logic}}

The word "proof" comes from the Latin ''probare'' (to test).
Related modern words are English "probe", "probation", and "probability", Spanish ''probar'' (to smell or taste, or sometimes touch or test),<ref>"proof" New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 1993, OUP, Oxford.</ref> Italian ''provare'' (to try), and German ''probieren'' (to try).
The legal term "probity" means authority or credibility, the power of testimony to prove facts when given by persons of reputation or status.<ref>{{cite book|title = The Emergence of Probability: A Philosophical Study of Early Ideas about Probability, Induction and Statistical Inference|first = Ian|last = Hacking|author-link=Ian Hacking |publisher = ] |year= 1984|orig-year=1975 |isbn=978-0-521-31803-7}}</ref>

Plausibility arguments using heuristic devices such as pictures and analogies preceded strict mathematical proof.<ref name="Krantz"/> It is likely that the idea of demonstrating a conclusion first arose in connection with ], which originated in practical problems of land measurement.<ref>{{cite book|title=The development of logic |first1=William |last1=Kneale |first2=Martha |last2=Kneale |author-link1=William Kneale (logician) |date=May 1985 |orig-year=1962 |page=3 |edition=New |publisher=] |isbn=978-0-19-824773-9}}</ref> The development of mathematical proof is primarily the product of ], and one of its greatest achievements.<ref>{{Cite web|url=https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01281050/document|title=The genesis of proof in ancient Greece The pedagogical implications of a Husserlian reading|last1=Moutsios-Rentzos|first1=Andreas|last2=Spyrou|first2=Panagiotis|date=February 2015|website=Archive ouverte HAL|access-date=October 20, 2019}}</ref> ] (624–546 BCE) and ] (c.
470–410 BCE) gave some of the first known proofs of theorems in geometry.
]
(408–355 BCE) and ] (417–369 BCE) formulated theorems but did not prove them.
]
(384–322 BCE) said definitions should describe the concept being defined in terms of other concepts already known.
Mathematical proof was revolutionized by ] (300 BCE), who introduced the ] still in use today.
It starts with ]s and ]s, propositions concerning the undefined terms which are assumed to be self-evidently true (from Greek "axios", something worthy).
From this basis, the method proves theorems using ].
Euclid's book, the ], was read by anyone who was considered educated in the West until the middle of the 20th century.<ref>{{cite book|title=An Introduction to the History of Mathematics (Saunders Series) |first=Howard W.
|last=Eves |author-link=Howard Eves |edition=6th |date=January 1990 |orig-year=1962 |page=141 |quote=No work, except The Bible, has been more widely used...
|publisher=] |isbn=978-0030295584}}</ref> In addition to theorems of geometry, such as the ], the ''Elements'' also covers ], including a proof that the ] is ] and a proof that there are infinitely many ]s.

Further advances also took place in ].
In the 10th century CE, the ] mathematician ] worked with numbers as such, called "lines" but not necessarily considered as measurements of geometric objects, to prove algebraic propositions concerning multiplication, division, etc., including the existence of ]s.<ref>{{citation|last=Matvievskaya|first=Galina|year=1987|title=The Theory of Quadratic Irrationals in Medieval Oriental Mathematics|journal=]|volume=500|issue=1|pages=253–77 |doi=10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb37206.x|bibcode=1987NYASA.500..253M|s2cid=121416910}}</ref> An ] for ] was introduced in the ''Al-Fakhri'' (1000) by ], who used it to prove the ] and properties of ].
Modern ] treats proofs as inductively defined ]s, not requiring an assumption that axioms are "true" in any sense.
This allows parallel mathematical theories as formal models of a given intuitive concept, based on alternate sets of axioms, for example ] and ].
==Nature and purpose==

As practiced, a proof is expressed in natural language and is a rigorous ] intended to convince the audience of the truth of a statement.
The concept of proof is formalized in the field of ].<ref>{{citation|title=Handbook of Proof Theory|volume=137|series=Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics|editor-first=Samuel R.|editor-last=Buss|editor-link=Samuel Buss|publisher=Elsevier|year=1998|isbn=978-0-08-053318-6|contribution=An introduction to proof theory|pages=1–78|first=Samuel R.|last=Buss|author-link=Samuel Buss}}.
See in particular : "The study of Proof Theory is traditionally motivated by the problem of formalizing mathematical proofs; the original formulation of first-order logic by Frege  was the first successful step in this direction.
"</ref> A ] is written in a ] instead of natural language.
A formal proof is a sequence of ] in a formal language, starting with an assumption, and with each subsequent formula a logical consequence of the preceding ones.
Indeed, the field of ] studies formal proofs and their properties, the most famous and surprising being that almost all axiomatic systems can generate certain ] not provable within the system.
However, outside the field of automated ]s, this is rarely done in practice.
A classic question in philosophy asks whether mathematical proofs are ] or ].
], who introduced the ], believed mathematical proofs are synthetic, whereas ] argued in his 1951 "]" that such a distinction is untenable.<ref>{{Cite web|url=https://www.theologie.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:ffffffff-fbd6-1538-0000-000070cf64bc/Quine51.pdf|title=Two Dogmas of Empiricism|last=Quine|first=Willard Van Orman|date=1961|website=Universität Zürich – Theologische Fakultät|page=12|access-date=October 20, 2019}}</ref>

Proofs may be admired for their ].
The mathematician ] was known for describing proofs which he found to be particularly elegant as coming from "The Book", a hypothetical tome containing the most beautiful method(s) of proving each theorem.
The book '']'', published in 2003, is devoted to presenting 32 proofs its editors find particularly pleasing.
=={{Anchor|Types of proof}}Methods of proof==

===Direct proof===
{{Main|Direct proof}}

In direct proof, the conclusion is established by logically combining the axioms, definitions, and earlier theorems.<ref>Cupillari, p.
20.</ref> For example, direct proof can be used to prove that the sum of two ] ]s is always even:

:Consider two even integers ''x'' and ''y''.
Since they are even, they can be written as ''x''&nbsp;=&nbsp;2''a'' and ''y''&nbsp;=&nbsp;2''b'', respectively, for some integers ''a'' and ''b''.
Then the sum is ''x''&nbsp;+&nbsp;''y''&nbsp;= 2''a''&nbsp;+&nbsp;2''b''&nbsp;= 2(''a''+''b'').
Therefore ''x''+''y'' has 2 as a ] and, by definition, is even.
This proof uses the definition of even integers, the integer properties of ] under addition and multiplication, and the ].
===Proof by mathematical induction===
{{Main|Mathematical induction}}
Despite its name, mathematical induction is a method of ], not a form of ].
In proof by mathematical induction, a single "base case" is proved, and an "induction rule" is proved that establishes that any arbitrary case ] the next case.
Since in principle the induction rule can be applied repeatedly (starting from the proved base case), it follows that all (usually ] many) cases are provable.<ref>Cupillari, p.
46.</ref> This avoids having to prove each case individually.
A variant of mathematical induction is ], which can be used, for example, to prove the ].
A common application of proof by mathematical induction is to prove that a property known to hold for one number holds for all ]s:<ref></ref>
Let {{math|1='''N''' = {1, 2, 3, 4, ...}}} be the set of natural numbers, and let {{math|''P''(''n'')}} be a mathematical statement involving the natural number {{math|''n''}} belonging to {{math|'''N'''}} such that
* '''(i)''' {{math|''P''(1)}} is true, i.e., {{math|''P''(''n'')}} is true for {{math|1=''n'' = 1}}.
* '''(ii)''' {{math|''P''(''n''+1)}} is true whenever {{math|''P''(''n'')}} is true, i.e., {{math|''P''(''n'')}} is true implies that {{math|''P''(''n''+1)}} is true.
* '''Then {{math|''P''(''n'')}} is true for all natural numbers {{math|''n''}}.'''
For example, we can prove by induction that all positive integers of the form {{math|2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1}} are ].
Let {{math|''P''(''n'')}} represent "{{math|2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1}} is odd":
:'''(i)''' For {{math|1=''n'' = 1}}, {{math|1=2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1&nbsp;=&nbsp;2(1)&nbsp;−&nbsp;1&nbsp;=&nbsp;1}}, and {{math|1}} is odd, since it leaves a remainder of {{math|1}} when divided by {{math|2}}.
Thus {{math|''P''(1)}} is true.
:'''(ii)''' For any {{math|''n''}}, if {{math|2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1}} is odd ({{math|''P''(''n'')}}), then {{math|(2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1)&nbsp;+&nbsp;2}} must also be odd, because adding {{math|2}} to an odd number results in an odd number.
But {{math|1=(2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1)&nbsp;+&nbsp;2&nbsp;=&nbsp;2''n''&nbsp;+&nbsp;1&nbsp;=&nbsp;2(''n''+1)&nbsp;−&nbsp;1}}, so {{math|1=2(''n''+1)&nbsp;−&nbsp;1}} is odd ({{math|''P''(''n''+1)}}).
So {{math|''P''(''n'')}} implies {{math|''P''(''n''+1)}}.
:'''Thus''' {{math|2''n''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1}} is odd, for all positive integers {{math|''n''}}.
The shorter phrase "proof by induction" is often used instead of "proof by mathematical induction".<ref> {{Webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120218033011/http://www.warwick.ac.uk/AEAhelp/glossary/glossaryParser.php?glossaryFile=Proof%20by%20induction.htm |date=February 18, 2012 }}, University of Warwick Glossary of Mathematical Terminology</ref>

===Proof by contraposition===
{{Main|Contraposition}}
] ] the statement "if ''p'' then ''q''" by establishing the ] ]: "if ''not q'' then ''not p''".
For example, contraposition can be used to establish that, given an integer <math>x</math>, if <math> x^2 </math> is even, then <math>x</math> is even:

: Suppose <math>x</math> is not even.
Then <math>x</math> is odd.
The product of two odd numbers is odd, hence <math> x^2  = x\cdot x </math> is odd.
Thus <math> x^2 </math> is not even.
Thus, if <math> x^2 </math> ''is'' even, the supposition must be false, so <math> x </math> has to be even.
===Proof by contradiction===
{{Main|Proof by contradiction}}
In proof by contradiction, also known by the Latin phrase '']'' (by reduction to the absurd), it is shown that if some statement is assumed true, a ] occurs, hence the statement must be false.
A famous example involves the proof that <math>\sqrt{2}</math> is an ]:

:Suppose that <math>\sqrt{2}</math> were a rational number.
Then it could be written in lowest terms as <math>\sqrt{2} = {a\over b}</math> where ''a'' and ''b'' are non-zero integers with ].
Thus, <math>b\sqrt{2} = a</math>.
Squaring both sides yields 2''b''<sup>2</sup> = ''a''<sup>2</sup>.
That is, ''a''<sup>2</sup> is even, which implies that ''a'' must also be even, as seen in the proposition above (in ]).
So we can write ''a'' = 2''c'', where ''c'' is also an integer.
Substitution into the original equation yields 2''b''<sup>2</sup> = (2''c'')<sup>2</sup> = 4''c''<sup>2</sup>.
Dividing both sides by 2 yields ''b''<sup>2</sup> = 2''c''<sup>2</sup>.
But then, by the same argument as before, 2 divides ''b''<sup>2</sup>, so ''b'' must be even.
However, if ''a'' and ''b'' are both even, they have 2 as a common factor.
This contradicts our previous statement that ''a'' and ''b'' have no common factor, so we must conclude that <math>\sqrt{2}</math> is an irrational number.
To paraphrase: if one could write <math>\sqrt{2}</math> as a ], this fraction could never be written in lowest terms, since 2 could always be factored from numerator and denominator.
===Proof by construction===
{{Main|Proof by construction}}
Proof by construction, or proof by example, is the construction of a concrete example with a property to show that something having that property exists.
], for instance, proved the existence of ]s by constructing an ].
It can also be used to construct a ] to disprove a proposition that all elements have a certain property.
===Proof by exhaustion===
{{Main|Proof by exhaustion}}
In proof by exhaustion, the conclusion is established by dividing it into a finite number of cases and proving each one separately.
For example, the first proof of the ] was a proof by exhaustion with 1,936 cases.
The shortest known proof of the four color theorem {{As of|2011|lc=on}} still has over 600 cases.<ref>See ].</ref>

===Probabilistic proof===
{{Main|Probabilistic method}}
A probabilistic proof is one in which an example is shown to exist, with certainty, by using methods of ].
Probabilistic proof, like proof by construction, is one of many ways to prove ]s.

In the probabilistic method, one seeks an object having a given property, starting with a large set of candidates.
The work toward the ] shows how far plausibility is from genuine proof, as does the disproof of the ].
While most mathematicians do not think that probabilistic evidence for the properties of a given object counts as a genuine mathematical proof, a few mathematicians and philosophers have argued that at least some types of probabilistic evidence (such as Rabin's ] for ]) are as good as genuine mathematical proofs.<ref>Davis, Philip J.
(1972), "Fidelity in Mathematical Discourse: Is One and One Really Two?"
''American Mathematical Monthly'' 79:252–63.</ref><ref>Fallis, Don (1997), "The Epistemic Status of Probabilistic Proof."
''Journal of Philosophy'' 94:165–86.</ref>

===Combinatorial proof===
{{Main|Combinatorial proof}}
A combinatorial proof establishes the equivalence of different expressions by showing that they count the same object in different ways.
Often a ] between two ] is used to show that the expressions for their two sizes are equal.
Alternatively, a ] provides two different expressions for the size of a single set, again showing that the two expressions are equal.
===Nonconstructive proof===
{{Main|Nonconstructive proof}}
A nonconstructive proof establishes that a ] with a certain property exists—without explaining how such an object can be found.
The following famous example of a nonconstructive proof shows that there exist two ]s ''a'' and ''b'' such that <math>a^b</math> is a ].
This proof uses that <math>\sqrt{2}</math> is irrational (an easy proof is known since ]), but not that <math>\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}</math> is irrational (this is true, but the proof is not elementary).
:Either <math>\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}</math> is a rational number and we are done (take <math>a=b=\sqrt{2}</math>), or <math>\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}</math> is irrational so we can write <math>a=\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}</math> and <math>b=\sqrt{2}</math>.
This then gives <math>\left (\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}\right )^{\sqrt{2}}=\sqrt{2}^{2}=2</math>, which is thus a rational number of the form <math>a^b.</math>

===Statistical proofs in pure mathematics===
{{Main| Statistical proof}}
The expression "statistical proof" may be used technically or colloquially in areas of ], such as involving ], ], and ] or ].<ref>"in number theory and commutative algebra...
in particular the statistical proof of the lemma."
</ref><ref>"Whether constant π (i.e., pi) is normal is a confusing problem without any strict theoretical demonstration except for some ''statistical'' proof"" (Derogatory use.
)</ref><ref>"these observations suggest a statistical proof of Goldbach's conjecture with very quickly vanishing probability of failure for large E" </ref> It is less commonly used to refer to a mathematical proof in the branch of mathematics known as ].
See also the "]" section below.
===Computer-assisted proofs===
{{Main|Computer-assisted proof }}
Until the twentieth century it was assumed that any proof could, in principle, be checked by a competent mathematician to confirm its validity.<ref name="Krantz">, Steven G.
Krantz.
February 5, 2007</ref> However, computers are now used both to prove theorems and to carry out calculations that are too long for any human or team of humans to check; the first proof of the ] is an example of a computer-assisted proof.
==Undecidable statements==
A statement that is neither provable nor disprovable from a set of ]s is called undecidable (from those axioms).
One example is the ], which is neither provable nor refutable from the remaining axioms of ].
Mathematicians have shown there are many statements that are neither provable nor disprovable in ] (ZFC), the standard system of set theory in mathematics (assuming that ZFC is consistent); see ].

]
shows that many axiom systems of mathematical interest will have undecidable statements.
==Heuristic mathematics and experimental mathematics==
{{Main|Experimental mathematics}}
While early mathematicians such as ] did not use proofs, from ] to the ] developments of the late 19th and 20th centuries, proofs were an essential part of mathematics.<ref>{{cite book|title=] |publisher=] |last1=Mumford |first1=David B.
|author1-link=David Mumford |last2=Series |first2=Caroline |author2-link=Caroline Series |last3=Wright |first3=David  |author3-link=David Wright (arranger) |year=2002 |isbn=978-0-521-35253-6 |quote=What to do with the pictures?
They furnished convincing evidence for many conjectures and lures to further exploration, but theorems were coins of the realm and the conventions of that day dictated that journals only published theorems.
}}</ref> With the increase in computing power in the 1960s, significant work began to be done investigating ]s beyond the proof-theorem framework,<ref>{{cite web|url=https://home.att.net/~fractalia/history.htm |title=A Note on the History of Fractals |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20090215114618/https://home.att.net/~fractalia/history.htm |archive-date=February 15, 2009 |url-status=dead |quote=Mandelbrot, working at the IBM Research Laboratory, did some computer simulations for these sets on the reasonable assumption that, if you wanted to prove something, it might be helpful to know the answer ahead of time.
}}</ref> in ].
the early development of ],<ref>{{cite book |title=Introducing Fractal Geometry |last=Lesmoir-Gordon |first=Nigel |publisher=] |year=2000 |isbn=978-1-84046-123-7 |quote=...brought home again to Benoit  that there was a 'mathematics of the eye', that visualization of a problem was as valid a method as any for finding a solution.
The teaching of mathematics in France was dominated by a handful of dogmatic mathematicians hiding behind the pseudonym 'Bourbaki'...
|url-access=registration |url=https://archive.org/details/introducingfract0000lesm }}</ref> which was ultimately so resolved.
==Related concepts==

===Visual proof===
Although not a formal proof, a visual demonstration of a mathematical theorem is sometimes called a "]".
The left-hand picture below is an example of a historic visual proof of the ] in the case of the (3,4,5) ].
<gallery>
File:Chinese pythagoras.jpg|Visual proof for the (3,4,5) triangle as in the ] 500–200&nbsp;BCE.
File:Pythagoras-2a.gif|Animated visual proof for the Pythagorean theorem by rearrangement.
File:Pythag anim.gif|A second animated proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
</gallery>

Some illusory visual proofs, such as the ], can be constructed in a way which appear to prove a supposed mathematical fact but only do so by neglecting tiny errors (for example, supposedly straight lines which actually bend slightly) which are unnoticeable until the entire picture is closely examined, with lengths and angles precisely measured or calculated.
===Elementary proof===
{{Main|Elementary proof}}
An elementary proof is a proof which only uses basic techniques.
More specifically, the term is used in ] to refer to proofs that make no use of ].
For some time it was thought that certain theorems, like the ], could only be proved using "higher" mathematics.
===Two-column proof===
]

A particular way of organising a proof using two parallel columns is often used as a ] in elementary geometry classes in the United States.<ref>{{cite journal |first=Patricio G.
|last=Herbst |title=Establishing a Custom of Proving in American School Geometry: Evolution of the Two-Column Proof in the Early Twentieth Century |journal=] |volume=49 |issue=3 |year=2002 |pages=283–312 |doi=10.1023/A:1020264906740 |hdl=2027.42/42653 |s2cid=23084607 |url=https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/2027.42/42653/1/10649_2004_Article_5096042.pdf |hdl-access=free }}</ref> The proof is written as a series of lines in two columns.
The left-hand column is typically headed "Statements" and the right-hand column is typically headed "Reasons".<ref>{{cite web|url=https://www.onemathematicalcat.org/Math/Geometry_obj/two_column_proof.htm |title=Introduction to the Two-Column Proof |author=Dr.
Fisher Burns |website=onemathematicalcat.org |access-date=October 15, 2009}}</ref>

===Colloquial use of "mathematical proof"===
The expression "mathematical proof" is used by lay people to refer to using mathematical methods or arguing with ]s, such as numbers, to demonstrate something about everyday life, or when data used in an argument is numerical.
===Statistical proof using data===
{{Main|Statistical proof}}
"Statistical proof" from data refers to the application of statistics, ], or ] to infer propositions regarding the ] of data.
While ''using'' mathematical proof to establish theorems in statistics, it is usually not a mathematical proof in that the ''assumptions'' from which probability statements are derived require empirical evidence from outside mathematics to verify.
In physics, in addition to statistical methods, "statistical proof" can refer to the specialized '']'' applied to analyze data in a ] experiment or ] in ].
"Statistical proof" may also refer to raw data or a convincing diagram involving data, such as ]s, when the data or diagram is adequately convincing without further analysis.
===Inductive logic proofs and Bayesian analysis===
{{Main|Inductive logic|Bayesian analysis}}
Proofs using ], while considered mathematical in nature, seek to establish propositions with a degree of certainty, which acts in a similar manner to ], and may be less than full ].
Inductive logic should not be confused with ].
Bayesian analysis uses ] to update a person's ] of hypotheses when new ] or information is acquired.
===Proofs as mental objects===
{{Main|Psychologism|Language of thought}}
Psychologism views mathematical proofs as psychological or mental objects.
Mathematician philosophers, such as ], ], and ] have variously criticized this view and attempted to develop a semantics for what they considered to be the ], whereby standards of mathematical proof might be applied to ].
===Influence of mathematical proof methods outside mathematics===
Philosopher-mathematicians such as ] have attempted to formulate philosophical arguments in an axiomatic manner, whereby mathematical proof standards could be applied to argumentation in general philosophy.
Other mathematician-philosophers have tried to use standards of mathematical proof and reason, without empiricism, to arrive at statements outside of mathematics, but having the ] of propositions deduced in a mathematical proof, such as ]' ] argument.
==Ending a proof==
{{Main|Q.E.D.}}
Sometimes, the abbreviation ''"Q.E.D."''
This abbreviation stands for ''"quod erat demonstrandum"'', which is ] for ''"that which was to be demonstrated"''.
A more common alternative is to use a square or a rectangle, such as □ or ∎, known as a "]" or "halmos" after its ] ].
Unicode explicitly provides the "end of proof" character, U+220E (∎) <small>(220E(hex) = 8718(dec))</small>.
==See also==
{{Portal|Philosophy|Mathematics}}
{{columns-list|colwidth=30em|
* ]
* ]
* ]
* ]
* ]
* ]
* ]
* ]
* ]
* '']''
* ]
}}

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==Further reading==
* {{citation|last=Pólya|first=G.|author-link=George Pólya|title=Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning|publisher=Princeton University Press|year=1954|title-link=Mathematics and plausible reasoning|hdl=2027/mdp.39015008206248|isbn=9780691080055|hdl-access=free}}.
* {{citation|last=Fallis|first=Don|year=2002|url=http://dlist.sir.arizona.edu/1581/|title=What Do Mathematicians Want?
Probabilistic Proofs and the Epistemic Goals of Mathematicians|journal=Logique et Analyse|volume=45|pages=373–88}}.
* {{citation|author1-link=James Franklin (philosopher)|last1=Franklin|first1=J.|last2=Daoud|first2=A.|url=http://www.maths.unsw.edu.au/~jim/proofs.html|title=Proof in Mathematics: An Introduction|publisher=Kew Books|year=2011|isbn=978-0-646-54509-7}}.
* {{cite book |title=Proof and Other Dilemmas: Mathematics and Philosophy |author1=Gold, Bonnie|author1-link=Bonnie Gold |author2=Simons, Rogers A.
|publisher=MAA |year=2008}}
* {{citation|last=Solow|first=D.|title=How to Read and Do Proofs: An Introduction to Mathematical Thought Processes|publisher=]|year=2004|isbn=978-0-471-68058-1}}.
* {{citation|last=Velleman|first=D.|title=How to Prove It: A Structured Approach|publisher=Cambridge University Press|year=2006|isbn=978-0-521-67599-4}}.
* {{citation |last=Hammack |first=Richard |title=Book of Proof |url=https://www.people.vcu.edu/~rhammack/BookOfProof |publisher= |year=2018 |isbn=978-0-9894721-3-5}}.
==External links==
{{wikiquote}}
{{Wiktionary|proof}}

* {{Commons category-inline}}
* 
* A ] about proofs, in a ] from ]

{{Mathematical logic}}
{{Logic}}
{{Authority control}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Mathematical Proof}}
]
]
]
]
]  Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
You agree that a hyperlink or URL is sufficient attribution under the Creative Commons license.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}   Wikidata entities used in this page  mathematical proof : Sitelink, Title, Description: en, Some statements, Miscellaneous (e.g.
For more help, see Help:Page history and Help:Edit summary .
(cur) = difference from current version, (prev) = difference from preceding version, m = minor edit , → = section edit , ← = automatic edit summary    ( newest | oldest ) View ( newer 50 | older 50 ) ( 20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500 )    20 February 2024  cur prev  22:10 22:10, 20 February 2024 ‎ Magyar25  talk  contribs ‎  37,524 bytes  −7 ‎  →‎Heuristic mathematics and experimental mathematics  undo  Tag : Visual edit  cur prev  22:06 22:06, 20 February 2024 ‎ Magyar25  talk  contribs ‎  37,531 bytes  +56 ‎  →‎Probabilistic proof  undo  Tag : Visual edit  9 February 2024  cur prev  11:43 11:43, 9 February 2024 ‎ DVdm  talk  contribs ‎  37,475 bytes  +449 ‎  Reverting edit(s) by Lachim314 ( talk ) to rev.
1187125337 by Mindmatrix: Unexplained content removal  (RW 16.1)  undo  Tags : RW  Undo  cur prev  09:32 09:32, 9 February 2024 ‎ Lachim314  talk  contribs ‎  37,026 bytes  −449 ‎  →‎Proof by contraposition : - The given example/proof was false  undo  Tag : Reverted  27 November 2023  cur prev  16:57 16:57, 27 November 2023 ‎ Mindmatrix  talk  contribs ‎  37,475 bytes  −271 ‎  rm promotional link to user-generated site disguised as a ref  undo  cur prev  09:55 09:55, 27 November 2023 ‎ Madeleinekale  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,746 bytes  +233 ‎  No edit summary  undo  Tag : Visual edit  9 November 2023  cur prev  12:16 12:16, 9 November 2023 ‎ Kuru  talk  contribs ‎  37,513 bytes  −233 ‎  rmv non- WP:RS : user generated material / open content platform  undo  Tag : Undo  7 November 2023  cur prev  14:01 14:01, 7 November 2023 ‎ Tom.Reding  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,746 bytes  +22 ‎  +{{ Authority control }} ( 1 ID from Wikidata ); WP:GenFixes & cleanup on  undo  Tag : AWB  16 October 2023  cur prev  14:04 14:04, 16 October 2023 ‎ Aaronbins  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,724 bytes  +233 ‎  No edit summary  undo  Tags : Reverted  Visual edit  22 September 2023  cur prev  03:39 03:39, 22 September 2023 ‎ Tony1  talk  contribs ‎  37,491 bytes  −55 ‎  Script -assisted style fixes  undo  6 August 2023  cur prev  10:17 10:17, 6 August 2023 ‎ Volokh0x  talk  contribs ‎  37,546 bytes  +167 ‎  Added "Book of Proof" by Richard Hammack to the Further readings section  undo  Tag : Visual edit  23 July 2023  cur prev  17:07 17:07, 23 July 2023 ‎ DMKR2005  talk  contribs ‎  37,379 bytes  −439 ‎  Also removed failed verification.
Source does not say Alhacen developed proof by contradiction, no does it say it was first attempt to prove parallel postulate  undo  Tag : Visual edit  cur prev  17:06 17:06, 23 July 2023 ‎ DMKR2005  talk  contribs ‎  37,818 bytes  −213 ‎  Removed unsourced claim introduced by jagged 85, who was banned for systematic abuse of sources  undo  Tag : Visual edit  30 June 2023  cur prev  08:18 08:18, 30 June 2023 ‎ D.Lazard  talk  contribs ‎  38,031 bytes  −278 ‎  Reverted 1 edit by 2A02:908:4B30:CE1:C3EC:6F34:CBF5:5EE3 ( talk ): Such a major change requires a consensus on the talk page  undo  Tags : Twinkle  Undo  cur prev  01:40 01:40, 30 June 2023 ‎ 2a02:908:4b30:ce1:c3ec:6f34:cbf5:5ee3  talk ‎  38,309 bytes  +278 ‎  →‎Nature and purpose  undo  Tag : Reverted  22 June 2023  cur prev  08:12 08:12, 22 June 2023 ‎ Niceguyedc  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,031 bytes  +10 ‎  v2.05 - Repaired 1 link to disambiguation page - (You can help) - Deduction  undo  Tag : WPCleaner  cur prev  08:03 08:03, 22 June 2023 ‎ Bogfudge  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,021 bytes  −3 ‎  math uses deductive reasoning  undo  Tag : Disambiguation links added  17 June 2023  cur prev  22:41 22:41, 17 June 2023 ‎ Mindmatrix  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,024 bytes  −24 ‎  Reverted edit by 2600:6C55:7600:433:5434:87E9:8B8F:31F4 ( talk ) to last version by 86.101.142.201  undo  Tag : Rollback  cur prev  16:55 16:55, 17 June 2023 ‎ 2600:6c55:7600:433:5434:87e9:8b8f:31f4  talk ‎  38,048 bytes  +24 ‎  No edit summary  undo  Tags : Reverted  Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  22 May 2023  cur prev  08:17 08:17, 22 May 2023 ‎ 86.101.142.201  talk ‎  38,024 bytes  −12 ‎  Fix link  undo  17 May 2023  cur prev  21:19 21:19, 17 May 2023 ‎ 31.204.3.69  talk ‎  38,036 bytes  +26 ‎  →‎External links  undo  25 March 2023  cur prev  19:14 19:14, 25 March 2023 ‎ DVdm  talk  contribs ‎  38,010 bytes  −21 ‎  Undid revision 1146573232 by 118.137.75.113 ( talk ) undo wp:easteregg  undo  Tag : Undo  cur prev  18:29 18:29, 25 March 2023 ‎ 118.137.75.113  talk ‎  38,031 bytes  +21 ‎  validity addition  undo  Tag : Reverted  23 March 2023  cur prev  06:42 06:42, 23 March 2023 ‎ Oblivy  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,010 bytes  −11 ‎  Reverted 1 edit by 103.138.74.171 ( talk ) to last revision by IronGargoyle  undo  Tags : Twinkle  Undo  cur prev  06:42 06:42, 23 March 2023 ‎ 103.138.74.171  talk ‎  38,021 bytes  +11 ‎  →‎Proof by construction  undo  Tags : Reverted  Visual edit  1 March 2023  cur prev  03:49 03:49, 1 March 2023 ‎ IronGargoyle  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,010 bytes  +28 ‎  Reverted edits by 2402:D000:8108:D881:BD40:E083:C55D:F511 ( talk ) ( HG ) (3.4.10)  undo  Tag : Rollback  cur prev  03:49 03:49, 1 March 2023 ‎ 2402:d000:8108:d881:bd40:e083:c55d:f511  talk ‎  37,982 bytes  −28 ‎  →‎Computer-assisted proofs  undo  Tag : Reverted  cur prev  03:49 03:49, 1 March 2023 ‎ IronGargoyle  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,010 bytes  +3 ‎  Reverted edits by 2402:D000:8108:D881:BD40:E083:C55D:F511 ( talk ) ( HG ) (3.4.10)  undo  Tag : Rollback  cur prev  03:48 03:48, 1 March 2023 ‎ 2402:d000:8108:d881:bd40:e083:c55d:f511  talk ‎  38,007 bytes  −2 ‎  →‎=Undecidable statements  undo  Tag : Reverted  cur prev  03:48 03:48, 1 March 2023 ‎ 2402:d000:8108:d881:bd40:e083:c55d:f511  talk ‎  38,009 bytes  −1 ‎  →‎Undecidable statements  undo  Tag : Reverted  15 January 2023  cur prev  20:20 20:20, 15 January 2023 ‎ 92.34.156.98  talk ‎  38,010 bytes  +3 ‎  →‎Proof by contradiction  undo  cur prev  20:19 20:19, 15 January 2023 ‎ 92.34.156.98  talk ‎  38,007 bytes  +15 ‎  →‎Proof by contradiction  undo  26 December 2022  cur prev  16:33 16:33, 26 December 2022 ‎ StarMS 2468  talk  contribs ‎  37,992 bytes  +3 ‎  →‎Nonconstructive proof : Fixed small grammatical error.
undo  Tags : Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  23 December 2022  cur prev  04:01 04:01, 23 December 2022 ‎ Dawnseeker2000  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,989 bytes  −4 ‎  clean up after myself  undo  cur prev  03:59 03:59, 23 December 2022 ‎ Dawnseeker2000  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,993 bytes  −91 ‎  date format audit, minor formatting  undo  Tag : AWB  22 November 2022  cur prev  17:13 17:13, 22 November 2022 ‎ D.Lazard  talk  contribs ‎  38,084 bytes  −262 ‎  Restored revision 1123215317 by Quantling ( talk ): Comment may be useful, but they are confusing when mixed with a quoted proof  undo  Tags : Twinkle  Undo  cur prev  16:17 16:17, 22 November 2022 ‎ Quantling  talk  contribs ‎  38,346 bytes  +262 ‎  →‎Nonconstructive proof : Walk the reader through a little more carefully  undo  Tag : Reverted  cur prev  16:06 16:06, 22 November 2022 ‎ Quantling  talk  contribs ‎ m   38,084 bytes  −28 ‎  →‎Nonconstructive proof : typo  undo  cur prev  15:46 15:46, 22 November 2022 ‎ D.Lazard  talk  contribs ‎  38,112 bytes  +147 ‎  →‎Nonconstructive proof : clarification of the nonconstructivity  undo  6 October 2022  cur prev  15:53 15:53, 6 October 2022 ‎ CactiStaccingCrane  talk  contribs ‎  37,965 bytes  +15 ‎  Changing short description from "Concept in mathematics" to "Reasoning for mathematical statements"  undo  Tag : Shortdesc helper  3 October 2022  cur prev  19:03 19:03, 3 October 2022 ‎ MrOllie  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,950 bytes  −71 ‎  Reverted 1 edit by 2600:8800:5602:5600:4825:F11E:3311:C21C ( talk ) to last revision by Quantling  undo  Tags : Twinkle  Undo  cur prev  19:01 19:01, 3 October 2022 ‎ 2600:8800:5602:5600:4825:f11e:3311:c21c  talk ‎  38,021 bytes  +71 ‎  No edit summary  undo  Tag : Reverted  26 September 2022  cur prev  22:04 22:04, 26 September 2022 ‎ Quantling  talk  contribs ‎  37,950 bytes  +27 ‎  →‎See also :  Zero-knowledge proof  undo  cur prev  19:32 19:32, 26 September 2022 ‎ MrOllie  talk  contribs ‎  37,923 bytes  −650 ‎  Restored revision 1109311923 by Sjö ( talk ): Not what this article is about  undo  Tags : Twinkle  Undo  cur prev  19:26 19:26, 26 September 2022 ‎ Mantis Orquida  talk  contribs ‎  38,573 bytes  +650 ‎  →‎{{Anchor|Types of proof}}Methods of proof : Added zero-knowledge proof.
undo  Tags : Reverted  2017 wikitext editor  9 September 2022  cur prev  04:55 04:55, 9 September 2022 ‎ Sjö  talk  contribs ‎ m   37,923 bytes  −30 ‎  Reverted edits by 218.188.215.132 ( talk ) to last version by Mgkrupa  undo  Tag : Rollback  cur prev  04:54 04:54, 9 September 2022 ‎ 218.188.215.132  talk ‎  37,953 bytes  +2 ‎  No edit summary  undo  Tag : Reverted  cur prev  04:53 04:53, 9 September 2022 ‎ 218.188.215.132  talk ‎  37,951 bytes  +28 ‎  →‎History and etymology  undo  Tag : Reverted  3 September 2022  cur prev  18:39 18:39, 3 September 2022 ‎ Mgkrupa  talk  contribs ‎  37,923 bytes  +27 ‎  Added {{Mathematical logic}}  undo  1 September 2022  cur prev  10:35 10:35, 1 September 2022 ‎ DVdm  talk  contribs ‎  37,896 bytes  −37 ‎  Restored revision 1107737759 by 98.21.219.152 ( talk ): Remove unsourced  undo  Tags : Twinkle  Undo   ( newest | oldest ) View ( newer 50 | older 50 ) ( 20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500 )  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "What links here ⧼whatlinkshere-whatlinkshere-target⧽ Page: ⧼whatlinkshere-whatlinkshere-ns⧽ Namespace: all (Article) Talk User User talk Wikipedia Wikipedia talk File File talk MediaWiki MediaWiki talk Template Template talk Help Help talk Category Category talk Portal Portal talk Draft Draft talk TimedText TimedText talk Module Module talk Invert selection ⧼whatlinkshere-whatlinkshere-filter⧽ Hide transclusions Hide links Hide redirects   Go   The following pages link to Mathematical proof    External tools ( link count  transclusion count  sorted list ) · See help page for transcluding these entries    Showing 50 items.
View ( previous 50 | next 50 ) ( 20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500 ) Algorithm ‎ ( links | edit )  Algebraic extension ‎ ( links | edit )  Arabs ‎ ( links | edit )  Automated theorem proving ‎ ( links | edit )  Abstraction ‎ ( links | edit )  Arithmetic ‎ ( links | edit )  Binomial theorem ‎ ( links | edit )  Naive set theory ‎ ( links | edit )  Calculus ‎ ( links | edit )  Software ‎ ( links | edit )  Category theory ‎ ( links | edit )  Conjecture ‎ ( links | edit )  Cantor set ‎ ( links | edit )  Context-sensitive grammar ‎ ( links | edit )  Chinese remainder theorem ‎ ( links | edit )  Complete metric space ‎ ( links | edit )  Discrete mathematics ‎ ( links | edit )  Differential cryptanalysis ‎ ( links | edit )  Euclid ‎ ( links | edit )  Euclidean geometry ‎ ( links | edit )  Euclidean space ‎ ( links | edit )  Euclidean domain ‎ ( links | edit )  Fibonacci sequence ‎ ( links | edit )  Functional programming ‎ ( links | edit )  Four color theorem ‎ ( links | edit )  Fundamental group ‎ ( links | edit )  Falsifiability ‎ ( links | edit )  Falsification ‎ ( links | edit )  Fundamental theorem on homomorphisms ‎ ( links | edit )  Finite set ‎ ( links | edit )  History of geometry ‎ ( links | edit )  Georg Cantor ‎ ( links | edit )  History of mathematics ‎ ( links | edit )  Isaac Newton ‎ ( links | edit )  Lambda calculus ‎ ( links | edit )  Lemma (mathematics) ‎ ( links | edit )  Mathematics ‎ ( links | edit )  Mathematical induction ‎ ( links | edit )  Group (mathematics) ‎ ( links | edit )  NP (complexity) ‎ ( links | edit )  Niels Henrik Abel ‎ ( links | edit )  Pythagoras ‎ ( links | edit )  Prime ideal ‎ ( links | edit )  Quadratic equation ‎ ( links | edit )  Q.E.D.
‎ ( links | edit )  Quadratic reciprocity ‎ ( links | edit )  Proof by contradiction ‎ ( links | edit )  Reversi ‎ ( links | edit )  Set (mathematics) ‎ ( links | edit )  Category of sets ‎ ( links | edit )  View ( previous 50 | next 50 ) ( 20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500 )  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:WhatLinksHere/Mathematical_proof " Enter a page name to see changes on pages linked to or from that page.
(To see members of a category, enter Category:Name of category).
Changes to pages on your Watchlist are shown in bold with a green bullet .
See more at Help:Related changes .
This article does apply to Arrow's impossibility theorem.
It's actually one of the first examples given.)
Tag : Undo  diff hist   m  Proof of impossibility ‎  21:31   +86 ‎ ‎ R'n'B  talk  contribs ‎ (redirect hatnote)  Tag : Reverted  diff hist   Function (mathematics) ‎  17:28   +8 ‎ ‎ Jacobolus  talk  contribs ‎ (put back "exactly one", which I think was helpful here: we want to be clear and explicit that (a) there is at least one element of Y assigned, and (b) there is no more than one element of Y assigned.
Including "exactly" is redundant but more emphatic and leaves no room for confusion)  diff hist   m  Thought experiment ‎  16:41   +6 ‎ ‎ Kodiologist  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎top : Boldfaced an alternative name.
)
diff hist   List of logic symbols ‎  15:02   +224 ‎ ‎ ElskverdigHug  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Image (mathematics) ‎  10:33   0 ‎ ‎ D.Lazard  talk  contribs ‎ ("All" excludes unduly images of subsets.
"The" is more ambiguous, which is better in this case, per WP:SDSHORT and WP:SDNOTDEF )  Tag : Shortdesc helper  diff hist   Image (mathematics) ‎  10:27   −7 ‎ ‎ D.Lazard  talk  contribs ‎ (Undid revision 1219147142 by Epachamo ( talk ) WP:SDNOTDEF : the previous SD is correct and less technical)  Tag : Undo  diff hist   Concrete category ‎  04:38   +281 ‎ ‎ Logic314  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   m  Wayback Machine ‎  02:25   −179 ‎ ‎ HaeB  talk  contribs ‎ (Reverted edits by 2600:1004:B17E:BBDB:0:3A:291F:4601 ( talk ) to last version by ClueBot NG)  Tag : Rollback  diff hist   Image (mathematics) ‎  01:23   +7 ‎ ‎ Epachamo  talk  contribs ‎ (Fixed erroneous short description.)
Tag : Reverted  diff hist   m  Oxford University Press ‎  00:28   −13 ‎ ‎ Davide King  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Tehran Book Fair controversy : ce )    15 April 2024  diff hist   Image (mathematics) ‎  23:57   +375 ‎ ‎ Epachamo  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Examples : Added yet another image in the example section.
)
diff hist   Wayback Machine ‎  23:25   +112 ‎ ‎ 2600:1004:b17e:bbdb:0:3a:291f:4601  talk ‎ ( →‎History : 358684699 )  Tags : Reverted  Mobile edit  Mobile web edit  diff hist   Image (mathematics) ‎  23:24   +335 ‎ ‎ Epachamo  talk  contribs ‎ (Added second image to demonstrate the Image of a subset of X.)
5th times the charm.)
diff hist   Cartesian product ‎  20:32   +44 ‎ ‎ Beland  talk  contribs ‎ ({{MOS|article| MOS:BBB |date=April 2024}})   diff hist   Venn diagram ‎  19:18   +22 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Square of opposition ‎  19:18   +22 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Truth table ‎  19:17   +22 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Sequent calculus ‎  19:16   +22 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Function (mathematics) ‎  19:14   −1 ‎ ‎ JBW  talk  contribs ‎ (Unnecessary comma)   diff hist   Function (mathematics) ‎  19:12   +2 ‎ ‎ JBW  talk  contribs ‎ (Restoring a word removed by mistake)   diff hist   Function (mathematics) ‎  19:10   −8 ‎ ‎ JBW  talk  contribs ‎ (Completing my last edit; I accidentally missed this part.)
diff hist   Function (mathematics) ‎  19:09   −11 ‎ ‎ JBW  talk  contribs ‎ (I don't see how "exactly one" conveys any more or better information than "one", and it does not, in general, assign one element of Y to every element of X: it may assign many different elements to different elements of X, but only one to each of them.)
diff hist   Propositional calculus ‎  18:52   +39 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Propositional connective semantics : cited assoc )  Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   Boolean function ‎  18:33   −20 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Examples : removed doubled link )   diff hist   Boolean function ‎  18:32   +35 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Examples )   diff hist   Boolean function ‎  18:31   +32 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎  diff hist   Propositional calculus ‎  18:28   +6 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Semantic proof via tableaux )  Tag : Visual edit  diff hist   m  Propositional calculus ‎  18:27   +3 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Propositional connective semantics )   diff hist   Propositional calculus ‎  18:26   +341 ‎ ‎ Thiagovscoelho  talk  contribs ‎ ( →‎Propositional connective semantics )     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Mathematical_proof "Wikimedia file upload wizard  Shortcut WP:FUW  Thank you for offering to contribute an image or other media file for use on Wikipedia.
Uploading media files Commons Wikipedia   Commons Wizard (recommended for free files)  Plain form for Commons (experienced users)  Old form     Files for upload process (recommended for new users)  Plain form for local uploads (experienced users)  Old guided form   Help and guidelines  Ask copyright questions  Image use policy  Non-free content  This wizard  Documentation  Script  Discuss        Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:File_upload_wizard&oldid=1164364166 " This page contains a list of special pages .
Most of the content of these pages is automatically generated and cannot be edited.
To suggest a change to the parts that can be edited, find the appropriate text on Special:AllMessages and then request your change on the talk page of the message (using {{ editprotected }} to draw the attention of administrators).
You can also see what message names are used on a page by adding ?uselang=qqx to the end of its URL, e.g.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:SpecialPages?uselang=qqx will show (specialpages-summary) in place of this message, which allows you to find MediaWiki:Specialpages-summary .
For an index of special pages, see Help:SpecialPages .
Legend Normal special pages.
Restricted special pages.
Maintenance reports Broken redirects  Dead-end pages  Dormant pages  Double redirects  Lint errors  Long pages  Orphaned pages  Pages not connected to items  Pages with the fewest revisions  Pages without language links  Protected pages  Protected titles  Short pages  Uncategorized categories  Uncategorized files  Uncategorized pages  Uncategorized templates  Unused categories  Unused files  Unused templates  Wanted categories  Wanted files  Wanted pages  Wanted templates  Lists of pages All pages  All pages with prefix  Categories  Category tree  Disambiguation pages  Entity usage  External links search  Pages linking to disambiguation pages  Pages on topics near you  Pages with a page property  Pages with badges  Redirects  Search  Tracking categories  Account management Bot passwords  Change credentials  Change or remove email address  Global preferences  Global user account rename request  Log in  Log out  Login unification status  Notifications  Preferences  Remove credentials  Reset password  Reset tokens  Topic subscriptions  Users and rights Active users list  Autoblocks  Blocked users  Create account  Email user  Global account manager  Global accounts list  Global group management  Grants  List OAuth applications  List of globally blocked IP addresses  Membership in global groups  Password policies  User contributions  User group rights  User groups management  Users  Recent changes and logs Edit Recovery  Edit filter log  Gallery of new files  New pages  New pages feed  Recent changes  Related changes  User logs  Valid change tags  Media reports and uploads File list  Global file usage  List of files with duplicates  MIME search  Media statistics  Orphaned TimedText pages  Search for duplicate files  VIPS scaling test page  Data and tools API feature usage  API sandbox  Book sources  Edit filter configuration  Expand templates  Gadget usage statistics  Gadgets  Statistics  System messages  Template sandbox  Try hieroglyph markup  Version  View interwiki data  Wiki sets  Wikimedia wikis  Redirecting special pages Delete a page  Differences  Edit a page  New section  Page history  Page info  Permanent link  Protect a page  Purge  Random article  Random page in category  Random redirect  Random root page  Redirect by file, user, page, revision, or log ID  High use pages Most linked-to categories  Most linked-to files  Most linked-to pages  Most transcluded pages  Pages with the most categories  Pages with the most interwikis  Pages with the most revisions  Page tools Book  Cite This Page  Compare pages  Export pages  Page assessments  QR Code Generator  URL Shortener  What links here  Spam tools Blocked External Domains  Growth tools Edit Growth configuration  Impact  Manage mentors  Mentor dashboard  Newcomer Tasks  Pending changes Page review statistics  Pages using Pending Changes  Pages with edits awaiting review  Other special pages Content Translation statistics  Contribute  Discussion tools data structure  Find comment  Global rename progress  Math Formula Information  Math status  ORES model statistics  SecurePoll  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:SpecialPages "Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
Contents   Basic information  Page protection  Edit history  Page properties  External tools    Basic information  Display title Mathematical proof Default sort key Mathematical Proof Page length (in bytes) 37,524 Namespace ID 0 Page ID 82285 Page content language en - English Page content model wikitext Indexing by robots Allowed Number of page watchers 422 Number of page watchers who visited recent edits 29 Number of redirects to this page 24 Counted as a content page Yes Wikidata item ID Q11538 Local description Reasoning for mathematical statements Central description rigorous demonstration that a mathematical statement follows from its premises Page image Page views in the past 30 days 11,602  Page protection  Edit Allow all users (no expiry set) Move Allow all users (no expiry set)  View the protection log for this page.
Edit history  Page creator Robert Merkel  ( talk | contribs ) Date of page creation 13:15, 8 September 2002 Latest editor Magyar25  ( talk | contribs ) Date of latest edit 22:10, 20 February 2024 Total number of edits 1,294 Recent number of edits (within past 30 days) 0 Recent number of distinct authors 0  Page properties  Hidden categories (8) This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links  Transcluded templates (101) Pages transcluded onto the current version of this page ( help ) :   Template:Authority control ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Cite book ( view source ) (protected) Template:Cite journal ( view source ) (protected) Template:Cite web ( view source ) (protected) Template:DMCA ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Dated maintenance category ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:FULLROOTPAGENAME ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:If empty ( view source ) (protected) Template:Main ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Main other ( view source ) (protected) Template:Navbox ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Nowrap ( view source ) (protected) Template:Ns has subpages ( view source ) (protected) Template:Pagetype ( view source ) (protected) Template:Portal ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Portal-inline ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Reflist ( view source ) (protected) Template:Reflist/styles.css ( view source ) (protected) Template:SDcat ( view source ) (protected) Template:See also ( view source ) (template editor protected) Template:Short description ( view source ) (protected) Template:Short description/lowercasecheck ( view source ) (protected) Template:Small ( view source ) (protected) Template:Yesno ( view source ) (protected) Template:Yesno-yes ( view source ) (template editor protected) Module:Arguments ( view source ) (protected) Module:Authority control ( view source ) (template editor protected) Module:Check for unknown parameters ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1 ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/COinS ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/Date validation ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/Identifiers ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/Utilities ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/Whitelist ( view source ) (protected) Module:Citation/CS1/styles.css ( view source ) (protected) Module:EditAtWikidata ( view source ) (protected) Module:If empty ( view source ) (protected) Module:Ns has subpages ( view source ) (protected) Module:Pagetype ( view source ) (protected) Module:Pagetype/config ( view source ) (protected) Module:Portal ( view source ) (template editor protected) Module:Portal/images/m ( view source ) (template editor protected) Module:Portal/images/p ( view source ) (template editor protected) Module:Portal/styles.css ( view source ) (template editor protected) Module:SDcat ( view source ) (protected) Module:String ( view source ) (protected) Module:TableTools ( view source ) (protected) Module:Unsubst ( view source ) (protected) Module:Yesno ( view source ) (protected) This list may be incomplete.
Wikidata entities used in this page mathematical proof Sitelink Title Description: en Some statements Miscellaneous (e.g.
aliases, entity existence) Category:Mathematical proofs Sitelink  External tools  Revision history search  Revision history statistics  Edits by user  Page view statistics  WikiChecker  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Contents  APA MLA MHRA Chicago CSE Bluebook AMA BibTeX wiki  IMPORTANT NOTE: Most educators and professionals do not consider it appropriate to use tertiary sources such as encyclopedias as a sole source for any information—citing an encyclopedia as an important reference in footnotes or bibliographies may result in censure or a failing grade.
Wikipedia articles should be used for background information, as a reference for correct terminology and search terms, and as a starting point for further research.
As with any community-built reference, there is a possibility for error in Wikipedia's content—please check your facts against multiple sources and read our disclaimers for more information.
Bibliographic details for "Mathematical proof"  Page name: Mathematical proof  Author: Wikipedia contributors  Publisher: Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia .
Date of last revision: 20 February 2024 22:10 UTC  Date retrieved: 17 April 2024 20:46 UTC  Permanent link: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086  Primary contributors: revision history statistics  Page Version ID: 1209227086  Please remember to check your manual of style, standards guide or instructor's guidelines for the exact syntax to suit your needs.
For more detailed advice, see Citing Wikipedia .
Citation styles  for "Mathematical proof"  APA style  Wikipedia contributors.
(2024, February 20).
Mathematical proof.
In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia .
Retrieved 20:46, April 17, 2024, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086   MLA Style Manual  Wikipedia contributors.
"Mathematical proof."
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia .
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 20 Feb.
2024.
Web.
17 Apr.
2024.
MHRA style  Wikipedia contributors, 'Mathematical proof', Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 20 February 2024, 22:10 UTC, < https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086 >   Chicago style  Wikipedia contributors, "Mathematical proof," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,  https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086 (accessed April 17, 2024).
CBE/CSE style  Wikipedia contributors.
Mathematical proof .
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia;  2024 Feb 20, 22:10 UTC .
Available from: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086 .
Bluebook style  Mathematical proof, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086 (last visited Apr.
17, 2024).
AMA style  Wikipedia contributors.
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
February 20, 2024, 22:10 UTC.
Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_proof&oldid=1209227086 .
Accessed April 17, 2024.
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:UrlShortener "   URL: Submit Links to the following domains may be shortened: *.wikipedia.org , *.wiktionary.org , *.wikibooks.org , *.wikinews.org , *.wikiquote.org , *.wikisource.org , *.wikiversity.org , *.wikivoyage.org , *.wikimedia.org , *.wikidata.org , *.wikifunctions.org and *.mediawiki.org .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:QrCode "  Download as PDF Mathematical_proof.pdf Download  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:DownloadAsPdf "The printable version is no longer supported and may have rendering errors.
Please update your browser bookmarks and please use the default browser print function instead.
History and etymology  See also: History of logic  The word "proof" comes from the Latin probare (to test).
Nature and purpose  As practiced, a proof is expressed in natural language and is a rigorous argument intended to convince the audience of the truth of a statement.
Methods of proof  Direct proof  Main article: Direct proof  In direct proof, the conclusion is established by logically combining the axioms, definitions, and earlier theorems.
Proof by mathematical induction  Main article: Mathematical induction  Despite its name, mathematical induction is a method of deduction , not a form of inductive reasoning .
Proof by contraposition  Main article: Contraposition  Proof by contraposition  infers the statement "if p then q " by establishing the logically equivalent  contrapositive statement : "if not q then not p ".
Proof by contradiction  Main article: Proof by contradiction  In proof by contradiction, also known by the Latin phrase reductio ad absurdum (by reduction to the absurd), it is shown that if some statement is assumed true, a logical contradiction occurs, hence the statement must be false.
Proof by construction  Main article: Proof by construction  Proof by construction, or proof by example, is the construction of a concrete example with a property to show that something having that property exists.
Proof by exhaustion  Main article: Proof by exhaustion  In proof by exhaustion, the conclusion is established by dividing it into a finite number of cases and proving each one separately.
Probabilistic proof  Main article: Probabilistic method  A probabilistic proof is one in which an example is shown to exist, with certainty, by using methods of probability theory .
Combinatorial proof  Main article: Combinatorial proof  A combinatorial proof establishes the equivalence of different expressions by showing that they count the same object in different ways.
Nonconstructive proof  Main article: Nonconstructive proof  A nonconstructive proof establishes that a mathematical object with a certain property exists—without explaining how such an object can be found.
Statistical proofs in pure mathematics  Main article: Statistical proof  The expression "statistical proof" may be used technically or colloquially in areas of pure mathematics , such as involving cryptography , chaotic series , and probabilistic number theory or analytic number theory .
Computer-assisted proofs  Main article: Computer-assisted proof  Until the twentieth century it was assumed that any proof could, in principle, be checked by a competent mathematician to confirm its validity.
Undecidable statements  A statement that is neither provable nor disprovable from a set of axioms is called undecidable (from those axioms).
Heuristic mathematics and experimental mathematics  Main article: Experimental mathematics  While early mathematicians such as Eudoxus of Cnidus did not use proofs, from Euclid to the foundational mathematics developments of the late 19th and 20th centuries, proofs were an essential part of mathematics.
Related concepts  Visual proof  Although not a formal proof, a visual demonstration of a mathematical theorem is sometimes called a " proof without words ".
Elementary proof  Main article: Elementary proof  An elementary proof is a proof which only uses basic techniques.
Two-column proof  A two-column proof published in 1913  A particular way of organising a proof using two parallel columns is often used as a mathematical exercise in elementary geometry classes in the United States.
Colloquial use of "mathematical proof"  The expression "mathematical proof" is used by lay people to refer to using mathematical methods or arguing with mathematical objects , such as numbers, to demonstrate something about everyday life, or when data used in an argument is numerical.
Statistical proof using data  Main article: Statistical proof  "Statistical proof" from data refers to the application of statistics, data analysis , or Bayesian analysis to infer propositions regarding the probability of data.
Inductive logic proofs and Bayesian analysis  Main articles: Inductive logic and Bayesian analysis  Proofs using inductive logic , while considered mathematical in nature, seek to establish propositions with a degree of certainty, which acts in a similar manner to probability , and may be less than full certainty .
Proofs as mental objects  Main articles: Psychologism and Language of thought  Psychologism views mathematical proofs as psychological or mental objects.
Influence of mathematical proof methods outside mathematics  Philosopher-mathematicians such as Spinoza have attempted to formulate philosophical arguments in an axiomatic manner, whereby mathematical proof standards could be applied to argumentation in general philosophy.
Ending a proof  Main article: Q.E.D.
Fragment of the second book of the Elements by Euclid  Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 29  Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 29 (P.
Oxy.
29) is a fragment of the second book of the Elements of Euclid in Greek .
It was discovered by Grenfell and Hunt in 1897 in Oxyrhynchus .
The fragment was originally dated to the end of the third century or the beginning of the fourth century, although more recent scholarship suggests a date of 75–125 CE.
It is housed in the library of the University of Pennsylvania (in a University Museum ,  E 2748).
The text was published by Grenfell and Hunt in 1898.
Description   The manuscript was written on papyrus in sloping irregular uncial letters, with no iota adscript , and with slight spelling errors.
The fragment measures 85 by 152 mm.
The fragment provides a statement of the 5th proposition of Book 2 of the Elements , together with an unlabelled diagram, and a tiny part of the preceding proposition.
No part of the proof is provided.
In translation, the statement is "If a straight line be cut into equal and unequal segments, the rectangle contained by the unequal segments of the whole together with the square on the straight line between the points of section is equal to the square on the half."
Ancient Greek mathematician (fl.
300 BC)    For the philosopher, see Euclid of Megara .
For other uses, see Euclid (disambiguation) .
Euclid Εὐκλείδης Euclid by Jusepe de Ribera , c.
1630–1635  Years active fl.
300 BC Known for The Elements Optics Data   Various concepts   Euclidean geometry  Euclidean algorithm  Euclid's theorem  Euclidean relation  Euclid's formula  Numerous other namesakes   Scientific career Fields Mathematics ( Geometry )   Euclid ( / ˈ j uː k l ɪ d / ; Greek : Εὐκλείδης ; fl.
300 BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician active as a geometer and logician .
Considered the "father of geometry",  he is chiefly known for the Elements treatise, which established the foundations of geometry that largely dominated the field until the early 19th century.
His system, now referred to as Euclidean geometry , involved new innovations in combination with a synthesis of theories from earlier Greek mathematicians, including Eudoxus of Cnidus , Hippocrates of Chios , and Theaetetus .
With Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga , Euclid is generally considered among the greatest mathematicians of antiquity, and one of the most influential in the history of mathematics .
Very little is known of Euclid's life, and most information comes from the scholars Proclus and Pappus of Alexandria many centuries later.
Medieval Islamic mathematicians invented a fanciful biography, and medieval Byzantine and early Renaissance scholars mistook him for the earlier philosopher Euclid of Megara .
It is now generally accepted that he spent his career in Alexandria and lived around 300 BC, after Plato 's students and before Archimedes.
There is some speculation that Euclid studied at the Platonic Academy and later taught at the Musaeum ; he is regarded as bridging the earlier Platonic tradition in Athens with the later tradition of Alexandria.
In the Elements , Euclid deduced the theorems from a small set of axioms .
He also wrote works on perspective , conic sections , spherical geometry , number theory , and mathematical rigour .
In addition to the Elements , Euclid wrote a central early text in the optics field, Optics , and lesser-known works including Data and Phaenomena .
Euclid's authorship of two other texts— On Divisions of Figures , Catoptrics —has been questioned.
He is thought to have written many now lost works .
Life  Traditional narrative  Detail of Raphael 's impression of Euclid, teaching students in The School of Athens (1509–1511)  The English name 'Euclid' is the anglicized version of the Ancient Greek name Eukleídes ( Εὐκλείδης ).
It is derived from ' eu- ' ( εὖ ; 'well') and 'klês' ( -κλῆς ; 'fame'), meaning "renowned, glorious".
In English, by metonymy , 'Euclid' can mean his most well-known work, Euclid's Elements , or a copy thereof,  and is sometimes synonymous with 'geometry'.
As with many ancient Greek mathematicians, the details of Euclid's life are mostly unknown.
He is accepted as the author of four mostly extant treatises—the Elements , Optics , Data , Phaenomena —but besides this, there is nothing known for certain of him.
The traditional narrative mainly follows the 5th century AD account by Proclus in his Commentary on the First Book of Euclid's Elements , as well as a few anecdotes from Pappus of Alexandria in the early 4th century.
According to Proclus, Euclid lived shortly after several of Plato 's ( d.
347 BC) followers and before the mathematician Archimedes ( c.
287 – c.
212 BC);  specifically, Proclus placed Euclid during the rule of Ptolemy I ( r.
305/304–282 BC).
Euclid's birthdate is unknown; some scholars estimate around 330   or 325 BC,   but others refrain from speculating.
It is presumed that he was of Greek descent,  but his birthplace is unknown.
Proclus held that Euclid followed the Platonic tradition , but there is no definitive confirmation for this.
It is unlikely he was contemporary with Plato, so it is often presumed that he was educated by Plato's disciples at the Platonic Academy in Athens.
Historian Thomas Heath supported this theory, noting that most capable geometers lived in Athens, including many of those whose work Euclid built on;  Sialaros considers this a mere conjecture.
In any event, the contents of Euclid's work demonstrate familiarity with the Platonic geometry tradition.
In his Collection , Pappus mentions that Apollonius studied with Euclid's students in Alexandria , and this has been taken to imply that Euclid worked and founded a mathematical tradition there.
The city was founded by Alexander the Great in 331 BC,  and the rule of Ptolemy I from 306 BC onwards gave it a stability which was relatively unique amid the chaotic wars over dividing Alexander's empire .
Ptolemy began a process of hellenization and commissioned numerous constructions, building the massive Musaeum institution, which was a leading center of education.
Euclid is speculated to have been among the Musaeum's first scholars.
Euclid's date of death is unknown; it has been speculated that he died c.
270 BC .
Identity and historicity  Domenico Maroli 's 1650s painting Euclide di Megara si traveste da donna per recarsi ad Atene a seguire le lezioni di Socrate .
At the time, Euclid the philosopher and Euclid the mathematician were wrongly considered the same person, so this painting includes mathematical objects on the table.
Euclid is often referred to as 'Euclid of Alexandria' to differentiate him from the earlier philosopher Euclid of Megara , a pupil of Socrates included in dialogues of Plato with whom he was historically conflated.
Valerius Maximus , the 1st century AD Roman compiler of anecdotes, mistakenly substituted Euclid's name for Eudoxus (4th century BC) as the mathematician to whom Plato sent those asking how to double the cube .
Perhaps on the basis of this mention of a mathematical Euclid roughly a century early, Euclid became mixed up with Euclid of Megara in medieval Byzantine sources (now lost),  eventually leading Euclid the mathematician to be ascribed details of both men's biographies and described as Megarensis ( lit.
'of Megara').
The Byzantine scholar Theodore Metochites ( c.
1300 ) explicitly conflated the two Euclids, as did printer Erhard Ratdolt 's 1482 editio princeps of Campanus of Novara 's Latin translation of the Elements .
After the mathematician Bartolomeo Zamberti  appended most of the extant biographical fragments about either Euclid to the preface of his 1505 translation of the Elements , subsequent publications passed on this identification.
Later Renaissance scholars, particularly Peter Ramus , reevaluated this claim, proving it false via issues in chronology and contradiction in early sources.
Medieval Arabic sources give vast amounts of information concerning Euclid's life, but are completely unverifiable.
Most scholars consider them of dubious authenticity;  Heath in particular contends that the fictionalization was done to strengthen the connection between a revered mathematician and the Arab world.
There are also numerous anecdotal stories concerning to Euclid, all of uncertain historicity, which "picture him as a kindly and gentle old man".
The best known of these is Proclus' story about Ptolemy asking Euclid if there was a quicker path to learning geometry than reading his Elements , which Euclid replied with "there is no royal road to geometry".
This anecdote is questionable since a very similar interaction between Menaechmus and Alexander the Great is recorded from Stobaeus .
Both accounts were written in the 5th century AD, neither indicates its source, and neither appears in ancient Greek literature.
Any firm dating of Euclid's activity c.
300 BC is called into question by a lack of contemporary references.
The earliest original reference to Euclid is in Apollonius' prefatory letter to the Conics (early 2nd century BC): "The third book of the Conics contains many astonishing theorems that are useful for both the syntheses and the determinations of number of solutions of solid loci .
Most of these, and the finest of them, are novel.
And when we discovered them we realized that Euclid had not made the synthesis of the locus on three and four lines but only an accidental fragment of it, and even that was not felicitously done."
The Elements is speculated to have been at least partly in circulation by the 3rd century BC, as Archimedes and Apollonius take several of its propositions for granted;  however, Archimedes employs an older variant of the theory of proportions than the one found in the Elements .
The oldest physical copies of material included in the Elements , dating from roughly 100 AD, can be found on papyrus fragments unearthed in an ancient rubbish heap from Oxyrhynchus , Roman Egypt .
The oldest extant direct citations to the Elements in works whose dates are firmly known are not until the 2nd century AD, by Galen and Alexander of Aphrodisias ; by this time it was a standard school text.
Some ancient Greek mathematicians mention Euclid by name, but he is usually referred to as "ὁ στοιχειώτης" ("the author of Elements ").
In the Middle Ages, some scholars contended Euclid was not a historical personage and that his name arose from a corruption of Greek mathematical terms.
Works  Elements  Main article: Euclid's Elements  A papyrus fragment of Euclid's Elements dated to c.
75–125 AD .
Found at Oxyrhynchus , the diagram accompanies Book II, Proposition 5.
Euclid is best known for his thirteen-book treatise, the Elements ( Greek : Στοιχεῖα ; Stoicheia ), considered his magnum opus .
Much of its content originates from earlier mathematicians, including Eudoxus , Hippocrates of Chios , Thales and Theaetetus , while other theorems are mentioned by Plato and Aristotle.
It is difficult to differentiate the work of Euclid from that of his predecessors, especially because the Elements essentially superseded much earlier and now-lost Greek mathematics.
The classicist Markus Asper concludes that "apparently Euclid's achievement consists of assembling accepted mathematical knowledge into a cogent order and adding new proofs to fill in the gaps" and the mathematician Serafina Cuomo described it as a "reservoir of results".
Despite this, Sialaros furthers that "the remarkably tight structure of the Elements reveals authorial control beyond the limits of a mere editor".
The Elements does not exclusively discuss geometry as is sometimes believed.
It is traditionally divided into three topics: plane geometry (books 1–6), basic number theory (books 7–10) and solid geometry (books 11–13)—though book 5 (on proportions) and 10 (on irrational lines) do not exactly fit this scheme.
The heart of the text is the theorems scattered throughout.
Using Aristotle's terminology, these may be generally separated into two categories: "first principles" and "second principles".
The first group includes statements labeled as a "definition" ( Greek : ὅρος or ὁρισμός ), "postulate" ( αἴτημα‎ ), or a "common notion" ( κοινὴ ἔννοια );   only the first book includes postulates—later known as axioms —and common notions.
The second group consists of propositions, presented alongside mathematical proofs and diagrams.
It is unknown if Euclid intended the Elements as a textbook, but its method of presentation makes it a natural fit.
As a whole, the authorial voice remains general and impersonal.
Contents  Euclid's postulates and common notions    No.
Postulates   Let the following be postulated:   1  To draw a straight line from any point to any point     2  To produce a finite straight line continuously in a straight line   3  To describe a circle with any centre and distance   4  That all right angles are equal to one another   5  That, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that side on which are the angles less than the two right angles   No.
Common notions   1  Things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another   2  If equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal   3  If equals be subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal   4  Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another   5  The whole is greater than the part  See also: Foundations of geometry  Book 1 of the Elements is foundational for the entire text.
It begins with a series of 20 definitions for basic geometric concepts such as lines , angles and various regular polygons .
Euclid then presents 10 assumptions (see table, right), grouped into five postulates (axioms) and five common notions.
These assumptions are intended to provide the logical basis for every subsequent theorem, i.e.
serve as an axiomatic system .
The common notions exclusively concern the comparison of magnitudes .
While postulates 1 through 4 are relatively straightforward,  the 5th is known as the parallel postulate and particularly famous.
Book 1 also includes 48 propositions, which can be loosely divided into those concerning basic theorems and constructions of plane geometry and triangle congruence (1–26); parallel lines (27–34); the area of triangles and parallelograms (35–45); and the Pythagorean theorem (46–48).
The last of these includes the earliest surviving proof of the Pythagorean theorem, described by Sialaros as "remarkably delicate".
Book 2 is traditionally understood as concerning " geometric algebra ", though this interpretation has been heavily debated since the 1970s; critics describe the characterization as anachronistic, since the foundations of even nascent algebra occurred many centuries later.
The second book has a more focused scope and mostly provides algebraic theorems to accompany various geometric shapes.
It focuses on the area of rectangles and squares (see Quadrature ), and leads up to a geometric precursor of the law of cosines .
Book 3 focuses on circles, while the 4th discusses regular polygons , especially the pentagon .
Book 5 is among the work's most important sections and presents what is usually termed as the "general theory of proportion".
Book 6 utilizes the "theory of ratios " in the context of plane geometry.
It is built almost entirely of its first proposition:  "Triangles and parallelograms which are under the same height are to one another as their bases".
From Book 7 onwards, the mathematician Benno Artmann  notes that "Euclid starts afresh.
Nothing from the preceding books is used".
Number theory is covered by books 7 to 10, the former beginning with a set of 22 definitions for parity , prime numbers and other arithmetic-related concepts.
Book 7 includes the Euclidean algorithm , a method for finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers.
The 8th book discusses geometric progressions , while book 9 includes the proposition, now called Euclid's theorem , that there are infinitely many prime numbers .
Of the Elements , book 10 is by far the largest and most complex, dealing with irrational numbers in the context of magnitudes.
The five Platonic solids , foundational components of solid geometry which feature in Books 11–13  The final three books (11–13) primarily discuss solid geometry .
By introducing a list of 37 definitions, Book 11 contextualizes the next two.
Although its foundational character resembles Book 1, unlike the latter it features no axiomatic system or postulates.
The three sections of Book 11 include content on solid geometry (1–19), solid angles (20–23) and parallelepipedal solids (24–37).
Other works  Euclid's construction of a regular dodecahedron  In addition to the Elements , at least five works of Euclid have survived to the present day.
They follow the same logical structure as Elements , with definitions and proved propositions.
Catoptrics concerns the mathematical theory of mirrors, particularly the images formed in plane and spherical concave mirrors, though the attribution is sometimes questioned.
The Data ( Greek : Δεδομένα ), is a somewhat short text which deals with the nature and implications of "given" information in geometrical problems.
On Divisions ( Greek : Περὶ Διαιρέσεων‎ ) survives only partially in Arabic translation, and concerns the division of geometrical figures into two or more equal parts or into parts in given ratios .
It includes thirty-six propositions and is similar to Apollonius' Conics .
The Optics ( Greek : Ὀπτικά‎ ) is the earliest surviving Greek treatise on perspective.
It includes an introductory discussion of geometrical optics and basic rules of perspective .
The Phaenomena ( Greek : Φαινόμενα ) is a treatise on spherical astronomy , survives in Greek; it is similar to On the Moving Sphere by Autolycus of Pitane , who flourished around 310 BC.
Lost works  Four other works are credibly attributed to Euclid, but have been lost.
The Conics ( Greek : Κωνικά‎ ) was a four-book survey on conic sections , which was later superseded by Apollonius' more comprehensive treatment of the same name.
The work's existence is known primarily from Pappus, who asserts that the first four books of Apollonius' Conics are largely based on Euclid's earlier work.
Doubt has been cast on this assertion by the historian Alexander Jones  , owing to sparse evidence and no other corroboration of Pappus' account.
The Pseudaria ( Greek : Ψευδάρια‎ ; lit.
'Fallacies'), was—according to Proclus in (70.1–18)—a text in geometrical reasoning , written to advise beginners in avoiding common fallacies.
Very little is known of its specific contents aside from its scope and a few extant lines.
The Porisms ( Greek : Πορίσματα ; lit.
'Corollaries') was, based on accounts from Pappus and Proclus, probably a three-book treatise with approximately 200 propositions.
The term ' porism ' in this context does not refer to a corollary , but to "a third type of proposition—an intermediate between a theorem and a problem—the aim of which is to discover a feature of an existing geometrical entity, for example, to find the centre of a circle".
The mathematician Michel Chasles speculated that these now-lost propositions included content related to the modern theories of transversals and projective geometry .
The Surface Loci ( Greek : Τόποι πρὸς ἐπιφανείᾳ ) is of virtually unknown contents, aside from speculation based on the work's title.
Conjecture based on later accounts has suggested it discussed cones and cylinders, among other subjects.
Legacy  See also: List of things named after Euclid  The cover page of Oliver Byrne 's 1847 colored edition of the Elements  Euclid is generally considered with Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga as among the greatest mathematicians of antiquity.
Many commentators cite him as one of the most influential figures in the history of mathematics .
The geometrical system established by the Elements long dominated the field; however, today that system is often referred to as ' Euclidean geometry ' to distinguish it from other non-Euclidean geometries discovered in the early 19th century.
Among Euclid's many namesakes are the European Space Agency 's (ESA) Euclid spacecraft,  the lunar crater Euclides ,  and the minor planet 4354 Euclides .
The Elements is often considered after the Bible as the most frequently translated, published, and studied book in the Western World 's history.
With Aristotle's Metaphysics , the Elements is perhaps the most successful ancient Greek text, and was the dominant mathematical textbook in the Medieval Arab and Latin worlds.
The first English edition of the Elements was published in 1570 by Henry Billingsley and John Dee .
The mathematician Oliver Byrne published a well-known version of the Elements in 1847 entitled The First Six Books of the Elements of Euclid in Which Coloured Diagrams and Symbols Are Used Instead of Letters for the Greater Ease of Learners , which included colored diagrams intended to increase its pedagogical effect.
David Hilbert authored a modern axiomatization of the Elements .
References  Notes    ^  In modern English, 'Euclid' is pronounced as / ˈ j uː k l ɪ d / .
^  Euclid's oeuvre also includes the treatise On Divisions , which survives fragmented in a later Arabic source.
He authored numerous lost works as well.
^  Some of the information from Pappus of Alexandria on Euclid is now lost and was preserved in Proclus 's Commentary on the First Book of Euclid's Elements .
^  Proclus was likely working from (now-lost) 4th-century BC histories of mathematics written by Theophrastus and Eudemus of Rhodes .
Proclus explicitly mentions Amyclas of Heracleia, Menaechmus and his brother Dinostratus , Theudius of Magnesia , Athenaeus of Cyzicus , Hermotimus of Colophon , and Philippus of Mende , and says that Euclid came "not long after" these men.
^  See Heath 1981 , p.
354 for an English translation on Proclus's account of Euclid's life.
^  Later Arab sources state he was a Greek born in modern-day Tyre, Lebanon , though these accounts are considered dubious and speculative.
See Heath 1981 , p.
355 for an English translation of the Arab account.
He was long held to have been born in Megara, but by the Renaissance it was concluded that he had been confused with the philosopher Euclid of Megara ,  see §Identity and historicity   ^  The Musaeum would later include the famous Library of Alexandria , but it was likely founded later, during the reign of Ptolemy II Philadelphus (285–246 BC).
^  The Elements version available today also includes "post-Euclidean" mathematics, probably added later by later editors such as the mathematician Theon of Alexandria in the 4th century.
^  The use of the term "axiom" instead of "postulate" derives from the choice of Proclus to do so in his highly influential commentary on the Elements .
Proclus also substituted the term "hypothesis" instead of "common notion", though preserved "postulate".
^  Euclid includes Q.E.D.
( quod erat demonstrandum ; lit.
'what was to be demonstrated') at the end of each proof, which has since become a long-standing tradition in the presentation of mathematical proofs.
^  See also: Euclidean relation   ^  The distinction between these categories is not immediately clear; postulates may simply refer to geometry specifically, while common notions are more general in scope.
^  The mathematician Gerard Venema notes that this axiomatic system is not complete: "Euclid assumed more than just what he stated in the postulates".
^  See Heath 1908 , pp.
195–201 for a detailed overview of postulates 1 through 4   ^  Since antiquity, enormous amounts of scholarship have been written about the 5th postulate, usually from mathematicians attempting to prove the postulate—which would make it different from the other, unprovable, four postulates.
^  Much of Book 5 was probably ascertained from earlier mathematicians, perhaps Eudoxus.
^  See Jones 1986 , pp.
547–572 for further information on the Porisms    Citations    ^  Getty .
^ a  b  c  d  Bruno 2003 , p.
125 .
^ a  b  Sialaros 2021 , § "Summary".
^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i  Sialaros 2021 , § "Life".
^ a  b  OED a .
^  OED b .
^ a  b  Heath 1981 , p.
354.
^ a  b  c  d  e  f  Asper 2010 , § para.
^ a  b  c  d  Sialaros 2021 , § "Works".
^  Heath 1911 , p.
741.
^ a  b  c  d  Ball 1960 , p.
52 .
^  Sialaros 2020 , p.
141.
^  Goulding 2010 , p.
125.
^ a  b  Smorynski 2008 , p.
2.
^ a  b  Boyer 1991 , p.
100 .
^  Goulding 2010 , p.
118.
^ a  b  Heath 1981 , p.
355.
^  Goulding 2010 , p.
126.
^ a  b  Heath 1908 , p.
2 .
^  Sialaros 2020 , pp.
147–148.
^  Sialaros 2020 , p.
142.
^ a  b  c  Bruno 2003 , p.
126 .
^  Ball 1960 , p.
51 .
^  Tracy 2000 , pp.
343–344.
^  Sialaros 2021 , § "Life" and Note 5.
^ a  b  c  Jones 2005 .
^ a  b  c  d  e  Goulding 2010 , p.
120.
^  Taisbak & Van der Waerden 2021 , § "Life".
^ a  b  Boyer 1991 , p.
101 .
^  Boyer 1991 , p.
96.
^  Sialaros 2018 , p.
90.
^  Heath 1981 , p.
357.
^  Ball 1960 , pp.
52–53 .
^  Fowler 1999 , pp.
210–211.
^ a  b  Asper 2010 , § para.
^ a  b  c  d  Asper 2010 , § para.
^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i  Taisbak & Van der Waerden 2021 , § "Sources and contents of the Elements ".
^  Cuomo 2005 , p.
131.
^ a  b  Artmann 2012 , p.
3.
^  Asper 2010 , § para.
^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  Sialaros 2021 , § "The Elements ".
^ a  b  Jahnke 2010 , p.
18.
5.
^  Heath 1908 , pp.
154–155.
^  Artmann 2012 , p.
3–4.
^ a  b  Wolfe 1945 , p.
4.
^  Pickover 2009 , p.
56.
^  Venema 2006 , p.
10.
^ a  b  c  d  Artmann 2012 , p.
4.
^  Heath 1908 , p.
202.
^  Artmann 2012 , p.
5.
^  Artmann 2012 , pp.
5–6.
^  Artmann 2012 , p.
6.
^  Heath 1908b , p.
191.
^ a  b  Artmann 2012 , p.
7.
^ a  b  c  Artmann 2012 , p.
9.
^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i  j  Sialaros 2021 , § "Other Works".
^ a  b  c  d  e  Taisbak & Van der Waerden 2021 , § "Other writings".
^ a  b  Jones 1986 , pp.
399–400.
^  Acerbi 2008 , p.
511.
^ a  b  c  Taisbak & Van der Waerden 2021 , § "Legacy".
^  "NASA Delivers Detectors for ESA's Euclid Spacecraft" .
Jet Propulsion Laboratory .
9 May 2017.
^  "Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature | Euclides" .
usgs.gov .
International Astronomical Union .
Retrieved 3 September 2017 .
^  "4354 Euclides (2142 P-L)" .
Minor Planet Center .
Retrieved 27 May 2018 .
^  Hawes & Kolpas 2015 .
^  Hähl & Peters 2022 , § para.
Sources  Books   Artmann, Benno (2012) .
Euclid: The Creation of Mathematics .
New York: Springer Publishing .
ISBN  978-1-4612-1412-0 .
Ball, W.W.
Rouse (1960) .
A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (4th ed.).
Mineola: Dover Publications .
ISBN  978-0-486-20630-1 .
Bruno, Leonard C.
(2003) .
Math and Mathematicians: The History of Math Discoveries Around the World .
Baker, Lawrence W.
Detroit: U X L.
ISBN  978-0-7876-3813-9 .
OCLC  41497065 .
Boyer, Carl B.
(1991) .
A History of Mathematics (2nd ed.).
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
ISBN  978-0-471-54397-8 .
Cuomo, Serafina (2005) .
Ancient Mathematics .
London and New York: Routledge .
ISBN  978-1-134-71019-5 .
Fowler, David (1999).
The Mathematics of Plato's Academy (2nd ed.).
Oxford: Clarendon Press .
ISBN  978-0-19-850258-6 .
Goulding, Robert (2010).
Defending Hypatia: Ramus, Savile, and the Renaissance Rediscovery of Mathematical History .
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
ISBN  978-90-481-3542-4 .
Heath, Thomas, ed.
(1908).
The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements .
Vol.
New York: Dover Publications .
ISBN  978-0-486-60088-8 .
Heath, Thomas , ed.
(1908b).
Heath, Thomas L.
(1981) .
A History of Greek Mathematics .
2 Vols.
ISBN  0-486-24073-8 , 0-486-24074-6  Jahnke, Hans Niels (2010).
"The Conjoint Origin of Proof and Theoretical Physics".
In Hanna, Gila ; Jahnke, Hans Niels; Pulte, Helmut (eds.).
Explanation and Proof in Mathematics: Philosophical and Educational Perspectives .
Berlin: Springer US .
ISBN  978-1-4419-0576-5 .
Jones, Alexander, ed.
(1986).
Pappus of Alexandria: Book 7 of the Collection .
Part 2: Commentary, Index, and Figures.
New York: Springer Science+Business Media .
ISBN  978-3-540-96257-1 .
Pickover, Clifford A.
(2009).
The Math Book: From Pythagoras to the 57th Dimension, 250 Milestones in the History of Mathematics .
New York: Sterling Publishing .
ISBN  978-1-4027-5796-9 .
Sialaros, Michalis (2018).
"How Much Does a Theorem Cost?"
In Sialaros, Michalis (ed.).
Revolutions and Continuity in Greek Mathematics .
Berlin: De Gruyter .
pp.
89–106.
ISBN  978-3-11-056595-9 .
Sialaros, Michalis (2020).
"Euclid of Alexandria: A Child of the Academy?".
In Kalligas, Paul; Balla, Vassilis; Baziotopoulou-Valavani, Chloe; Karasmanis, Effie (eds.).
Plato's Academy .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .
141–152.
ISBN  978-1-108-42644-2 .
Smorynski, Craig (2008).
History of Mathematics: A Supplement .
ISBN  978-0-387-75480-2 .
Tracy, Stephen V (2000).
"Demetrius of Phalerum: Who was He and Who was He Not?".
In Fortenbaugh, William W.; Schütrumpf, Eckhart (eds.).
Demetrius of Phalerum: Text, Translation and Discussion .
Rutgers University Studies in Classical Humanities.
IX.
New Brunswick and London: Transaction Publishers .
ISBN  978-1-3513-2690-2 .
Venema, Gerard (2006).
The Foundations of Geometry .
Hoboken: Pearson Prentice Hall .
ISBN  978-0-13-143700-5 .
Wolfe, Harold E.
(1945).
Introduction To Non-Euclidean Geometry .
New York: Dryden Press .
Articles   Acerbi, Fabio (September 2008).
"Euclid's Pseudaria".
Archive for History of Exact Sciences .
62 (5): 511–551.
doi : 10.1007/s00407-007-0017-3 .
JSTOR  41134289 .
S2CID  120860272 .
Jones, Alexander (2005).
"Euclid, the Elusive Geometer"  (PDF) .
Euclid and His Heritage Meeting, Clay Mathematics Institute, Oxford, 7–8 October 2005.
Asper, Markus (2010).
"Euclid" .
In Gagarin, Michael (ed.).
The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome .
Oxford: Oxford University Press .
ISBN  978-0-19-517072-6 .
Hähl, Hermann; Peters, Hanna (10 June 2022).
"A Variation of Hilbert's Axioms for Euclidean Geometry" .
Mathematische Semesterberichte .
69 (2): 253–258.
doi : 10.1007/s00591-022-00320-3 .
S2CID  249581871 .
Hawes, Susan M.; Kolpas, Sid (August 2015).
"Oliver Byrne: The Matisse of Mathematics – Biography 1810–1829" .
Mathematical Association of America .
Retrieved 10 August 2022 .
Heath, Thomas Little (1911).
"Pappus of Alexandria" .
In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).
Encyclopædia Britannica .
20 (11th ed.).
Cambridge University Press.
470–471.
Sialaros, Michalis (2021) .
Oxford Classical Dictionary .
doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.2521 .
ISBN  978-0-19-938113-5 .
Taisbak, Christian Marinus; van der Waerden, Bartel Leendert (5 January 2021).
Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
  Online   "Euclid" .
J.
Paul Getty Museum .
Retrieved 11 August 2022 .
"Euclid, n" .
OED Online .
(subscription required)  "Euclidean (adj.)"
Online Etymology Dictionary .
Retrieved 18 March 2015 .
External links  Listen to this article ( 13 minutes )  This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 29 September 2020 ( 2020-09-29 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.
( Audio help · More spoken articles )  Works  Works by Euclid at Project Gutenberg  Works by or about Euclid at Internet Archive  Works by Euclid at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Euclid Collection at University College London (c.500 editions of works by Euclid), available online through the Stavros Niarchos Foundation Digital Library .
Scans of Johan Heiberg 's edition of Euclid at wilbourhall.org  The Elements  PDF copy , with the original Greek and an English translation on facing pages, University of Texas .
All thirteen books , in several languages as Spanish, Catalan, English, German, Portuguese, Arabic, Italian, Russian and Chinese.
Portals :  Ancient Greece  Biography  Mathematics Euclid at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity  v t e Euclid Works  Data  Elements  Optics  Phaenomena  Topics  Namesakes  Euclidean geometry  Euclidean algorithm  Euclid's theorem  Euclidean relation  Scholars  Thomas Heath  Johan Ludvig Heiberg  Robert Simson  Isaac Todhunter  Related  Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 29    Category   v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline)  Anaxagoras  Anthemius  Archytas  Aristaeus the Elder  Aristarchus  Aristotle  Apollonius  Archimedes  Autolycus  Bion  Bryson  Callippus  Carpus  Chrysippus  Cleomedes  Conon  Ctesibius  Democritus  Dicaearchus  Diocles  Diophantus  Dinostratus  Dionysodorus  Domninus  Eratosthenes  Eudemus  Euclid  Eudoxus  Eutocius  Geminus  Heliodorus  Heron  Hipparchus  Hippasus  Hippias  Hippocrates  Hypatia  Hypsicles  Isidore of Miletus  Leon  Marinus  Menaechmus  Menelaus  Metrodorus  Nicomachus  Nicomedes  Nicoteles  Oenopides  Pappus  Perseus  Philolaus  Philon  Philonides  Plato  Porphyry  Posidonius  Proclus  Ptolemy  Pythagoras  Serenus  Simplicius  Sosigenes  Sporus  Thales  Theaetetus  Theano  Theodorus  Theodosius  Theon of Alexandria  Theon of Smyrna  Thymaridas  Xenocrates  Zeno of Elea  Zeno of Sidon  Zenodorus  Treatises  Almagest  Archimedes Palimpsest  Arithmetica  Conics  (Apollonius)  Catoptrics  Data  (Euclid)  Elements  (Euclid)  Measurement of a Circle  On Conoids and Spheroids  On the Sizes and Distances  (Aristarchus)  On Sizes and Distances  (Hipparchus)  On the Moving Sphere  (Autolycus)  Optics  (Euclid)  On Spirals  On the Sphere and Cylinder  Ostomachion  Planisphaerium  Spherics  (Theodosius)  Spherics  (Menelaus)  The Quadrature of the Parabola  The Sand Reckoner  Problems  Constructible numbers  Angle trisection  Doubling the cube  Squaring the circle  Problem of Apollonius  Concepts and definitions  Angle  Central  Inscribed  Axiomatic system  Axiom  Chord  Circles of Apollonius  Apollonian circles  Apollonian gasket  Circumscribed circle  Commensurability  Diophantine equation  Doctrine of proportionality  Euclidean geometry  Golden ratio  Greek numerals  Incircle and excircles of a triangle  Method of exhaustion  Parallel postulate  Platonic solid  Lune of Hippocrates  Quadratrix of Hippias  Regular polygon  Straightedge and compass construction  Triangle center  Results In Elements  Angle bisector theorem  Exterior angle theorem  Euclidean algorithm  Euclid's theorem  Geometric mean theorem  Greek geometric algebra  Hinge theorem  Inscribed angle theorem  Intercept theorem  Intersecting chords theorem  Intersecting secants theorem  Law of cosines  Pons asinorum  Pythagorean theorem  Tangent-secant theorem  Thales's theorem  Theorem of the gnomon  Apollonius  Apollonius's theorem  Other  Aristarchus's inequality  Crossbar theorem  Heron's formula  Irrational numbers  Law of sines  Menelaus's theorem  Pappus's area theorem  Problem II.8 of Arithmetica  Ptolemy's inequality  Ptolemy's table of chords  Ptolemy's theorem  Spiral of Theodorus  Centers  Cyrene  Mouseion of Alexandria  Platonic Academy  Related  Ancient Greek astronomy  Attic numerals  Greek numerals  Latin translations of the 12th century  Non-Euclidean geometry  Philosophy of mathematics  Neusis construction  History of  A History of Greek Mathematics  by Thomas Heath  algebra  timeline  arithmetic  timeline  calculus  timeline  geometry  timeline  logic  timeline  mathematics  timeline  numbers  prehistoric counting  numeral systems  list  Other cultures  Arabian/Islamic  Babylonian  Chinese  Egyptian  Incan  Indian  Japanese   Ancient Greece portal •  Mathematics portal  Authority control databases  International  FAST  ISNI  VIAF  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  National  Norway  Chile  Spain  France  BnF data  Argentina  Catalonia  Germany  Italy  Israel  Finland  Belgium  United States  Sweden  Latvia  Japan  Czech Republic  Australia  Greece  Korea  Croatia  Netherlands  Poland  Portugal  Russia  Vatican  Academics  CiNii  MathSciNet  zbMATH  Artists  ULAN  People  Deutsche Biographie  Trove  Other  SNAC  IdRef  İslâm Ansiklopedisi       Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Euclid&oldid=1213422112 "Mathematical treatise by Euclid  Elements Title page of Sir Henry Billingsley's first English version of Euclid's Elements , 1570.
During the Renaissance , Euclid was commonly conflated with the philosopher Euclid of Megara .
Author Euclid Language Ancient Greek Subject plane and solid geometry , number theory , incommensurable lines Genre Mathematics Publication date c.
300 BC Pages 13 books  The Elements ( Greek : Στοιχεῖα  Stoikheîa ) is a mathematical  treatise consisting of 13 books attributed to the ancient Greek mathematician  Euclid  c.
300 BC.
It is a collection of definitions, postulates , propositions ( theorems and constructions ), and mathematical proofs of the propositions.
The books cover plane and solid Euclidean geometry , elementary number theory , and incommensurable lines.
Elements is the oldest extant large-scale deductive treatment of mathematics.
It has proven instrumental in the development of logic and modern science , and its logical rigor was not surpassed until the 19th century.
Euclid's Elements has been referred to as the most successful   and influential   textbook ever written.
It was one of the very earliest mathematical works to be printed after the invention of the printing press and has been estimated to be second only to the Bible in the number of editions published since the first printing in 1482,  the number reaching well over one thousand.
For centuries, when the quadrivium was included in the curriculum of all university students, knowledge of at least part of Euclid's Elements was required of all students.
Not until the 20th century, by which time its content was universally taught through other school textbooks, did it cease to be considered something all educated people had read.
History   A fragment of Euclid's Elements on part of the Oxyrhynchus papyri  Double-page from the Ishaq ibn Hunayn's Arabic Translation of Elementa.
Iraq , 1270.
Chester Beatty Library  Basis in earlier work   An illumination from a manuscript based on Adelard of Bath 's translation of the Elements , c.
1309–1316; Adelard's is the oldest surviving translation of the Elements into Latin, done in the 12th-century work and translated from Arabic.
Scholars believe that the Elements is largely a compilation of propositions based on books by earlier Greek mathematicians.
Proclus (412–485 AD), a Greek mathematician who lived around seven centuries after Euclid, wrote in his commentary on the Elements : "Euclid, who put together the Elements , collecting many of Eudoxus ' theorems, perfecting many of Theaetetus ', and also bringing to irrefragable demonstration the things which were only somewhat loosely proved by his predecessors".
Pythagoras ( c.
570–495 BC) was probably the source for most of books I and II, Hippocrates of Chios ( c.
470–410 BC, not the better known Hippocrates of Kos ) for book III, and Eudoxus of Cnidus ( c.
408–355 BC) for book V, while books IV, VI, XI, and XII probably came from other Pythagorean or Athenian mathematicians.
The Elements may have been based on an earlier textbook by Hippocrates of Chios, who also may have originated the use of letters to refer to figures.
Other similar works are also reported to have been written by Theudius of Magnesia , Leon , and Hermotimus of Colophon.
Transmission of the text   In the 4th century AD, Theon of Alexandria produced an edition of Euclid which was so widely used that it became the only surviving source until François Peyrard 's 1808 discovery at the Vatican of a manuscript not derived from Theon's.
This manuscript, the Heiberg manuscript, is from a Byzantine workshop around 900 and is the basis of modern editions.
Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 29 is a tiny fragment of an even older manuscript, but only contains the statement of one proposition.
Although Euclid was known to Cicero , for instance, no record exists of the text having been translated into Latin prior to Boethius in the fifth or sixth century.
The Arabs received the Elements from the Byzantines around 760; this version was translated into Arabic under Harun al-Rashid ( c.
800).
The Byzantine scholar Arethas commissioned the copying of one of the extant Greek manuscripts of Euclid in the late ninth century.
Although known in Byzantium, the Elements was lost to Western Europe until about 1120, when the English monk Adelard of Bath translated it into Latin from an Arabic translation.
A relatively recent discovery was made of a Greek-to-Latin translation from the 12th century at Palermo, Sicily.
The name of the translator is not known other than he was an anonymous medical student from Salerno who was visiting Palermo in order to translate the Almagest to Latin.
The Euclid manuscript is extant and quite complete.
After the translation by Adelard of Bath (known as Adelard I), there was a flurry of translations from Arabic.
Notable translators in this period include Herman of Carinthia who wrote an edition around 1140, Robert of Chester (his manuscripts are referred to collectively as Adelard II, written on or before 1251), Johannes de Tinemue,  possibly also known as John of Tynemouth (his manuscripts are referred to collectively as Adelard III), late 12th century, and Gerard of Cremona (sometime after 1120 but before 1187).
The exact details concerning these translations is still an active area of research.
Campanus of Novara relied heavily on these Arabic translations to create his edition (sometime before 1260) which ultimately came to dominate Latin editions until the availability of Greek manuscripts in the 16th century.
There are more than 100 pre-1482 Campanus manuscripts still available today.
Euclidis – Elementorum libri XV Paris, Hieronymum de Marnef & Guillaume Cavelat, 1573 (second edition after the 1557 ed.
); in  8:350, (2)pp.
THOMAS–STANFORD, Early Editions of Euclid's Elements , n°32.
Mentioned in T.L.
Heath's translation.
Private collection Hector Zenil.
The first printed edition appeared in 1482 (based on Campanus's translation),  and since then it has been translated into many languages and published in about a thousand different editions.
Theon's Greek edition was recovered and published in 1533  based on Paris gr.
2343 and Venetus Marcianus 301.
In 1570, John Dee provided a widely respected "Mathematical Preface", along with copious notes and supplementary material, to the first English edition by Henry Billingsley .
Copies of the Greek text still exist, some of which can be found in the Vatican Library and the Bodleian Library in Oxford.
The manuscripts available are of variable quality, and invariably incomplete.
By careful analysis of the translations and originals, hypotheses have been made about the contents of the original text (copies of which are no longer available).
Ancient texts which refer to the Elements itself, and to other mathematical theories that were current at the time it was written, are also important in this process.
Such analyses are conducted by J.
L.
Heiberg and Sir Thomas Little Heath in their editions of the text.
Also of importance are the scholia , or annotations to the text.
These additions, which often distinguished themselves from the main text (depending on the manuscript), gradually accumulated over time as opinions varied upon what was worthy of explanation or further study.
Influence   A page with marginalia from the first printed edition of Elements , printed by Erhard Ratdolt in 1482  The Elements is still considered a masterpiece in the application of logic to mathematics .
In historical context, it has proven enormously influential in many areas of science .
Scientists Nicolaus Copernicus , Johannes Kepler , Galileo Galilei , Albert Einstein and Sir Isaac Newton were all influenced by the Elements , and applied their knowledge of it to their work.
Mathematicians and philosophers, such as Thomas Hobbes , Baruch Spinoza , Alfred North Whitehead , and Bertrand Russell , have attempted to create their own foundational "Elements" for their respective disciplines, by adopting the axiomatized deductive structures that Euclid's work introduced.
The austere beauty of Euclidean geometry has been seen by many in western culture as a glimpse of an otherworldly system of perfection and certainty.
Abraham Lincoln kept a copy of Euclid in his saddlebag, and studied it late at night by lamplight; he related that he said to himself, "You never can make a lawyer if you do not understand what demonstrate means; and I left my situation in Springfield , went home to my father's house, and stayed there till I could give any proposition in the six books of Euclid at sight".
Edna St. Vincent Millay wrote in her sonnet " Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare ", "O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day, / When first the shaft into his vision shone / Of light anatomized!".
Albert Einstein recalled a copy of the Elements and a magnetic compass as two gifts that had a great influence on him as a boy, referring to the Euclid as the "holy little geometry book".
The success of the Elements is due primarily to its logical presentation of most of the mathematical knowledge available to Euclid.
Much of the material is not original to him, although many of the proofs are his.
However, Euclid's systematic development of his subject, from a small set of axioms to deep results, and the consistency of his approach throughout the Elements , encouraged its use as a textbook for about 2,000 years.
The Elements still influences modern geometry books.
Furthermore, its logical, axiomatic approach and rigorous proofs remain the cornerstone of mathematics.
In modern mathematics  One of the most notable influences of Euclid on modern mathematics is the discussion of the parallel postulate .
In Book I, Euclid lists five postulates, the fifth of which stipulates If a line segment intersects two straight lines forming two interior angles on the same side that sum to less than two right angles , then the two lines, if extended indefinitely, meet on that side on which the angles sum to less than two right angles.
The different versions of the parallel postulate result in different geometries.
This postulate plagued mathematicians for centuries due to its apparent complexity compared with the other four postulates.
Many attempts were made to prove the fifth postulate based on the other four, but they never succeeded.
Eventually in 1829, mathematician Nikolai Lobachevsky published a description of acute geometry (or hyperbolic geometry ), a geometry which assumed a different form of the parallel postulate.
It is in fact possible to create a valid geometry without the fifth postulate entirely, or with different versions of the fifth postulate ( elliptic geometry ).
If one takes the fifth postulate as a given, the result is Euclidean geometry .
Contents   Book 1 contains 5 postulates (including the infamous parallel postulate ) and 5 common notions, and covers important topics of plane geometry such as the Pythagorean theorem , equality of angles and areas , parallelism, the sum of the angles in a triangle, and the construction of various geometric figures.
Book 2 contains a number of lemmas concerning the equality of rectangles and squares, sometimes referred to as " geometric algebra ", and concludes with a construction of the golden ratio and a way of constructing a square equal in area to any rectilineal plane figure.
Book 3 deals with circles and their properties: finding the center, inscribed angles, tangents , the power of a point, Thales' theorem .
Book 4 constructs the incircle and circumcircle of a triangle, as well as regular polygons with 4, 5, 6, and 15 sides.
Book 5, on proportions of magnitudes , gives the highly sophisticated theory of proportion probably developed by Eudoxus , and proves properties such as "alternation" (if a : b :: c : d , then a : c :: b : d ).
Book 6 applies proportions to plane geometry, especially the construction and recognition of similar figures.
Book 7 deals with elementary number theory: divisibility , prime numbers and their relation to composite numbers , Euclid's algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor , finding the least common multiple .
Book 8 deals with the construction and existence of geometric sequences of integers.
Book 9 applies the results of the preceding two books and gives the infinitude of prime numbers and the construction of all even perfect numbers .
Book 10 proves the irrationality of the square roots of non-square integers (e.g.
2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   ) and classifies the square roots of incommensurable lines into thirteen disjoint categories.
Euclid here introduces the term "irrational", which has a different meaning than the modern concept of irrational numbers .
He also gives a formula to produce Pythagorean triples .
Book 11 generalizes the results of book 6 to solid figures: perpendicularity, parallelism, volumes and similarity of parallelepipeds .
Book 12 studies the volumes of cones , pyramids , and cylinders in detail by using the method of exhaustion , a precursor to integration , and shows, for example, that the volume of a cone is a third of the volume of the corresponding cylinder.
It concludes by showing that the volume of a sphere is proportional to the cube of its radius (in modern language) by approximating its volume by a union of many pyramids.
Book 13 constructs the five regular Platonic solids inscribed in a sphere and compares the ratios of their edges to the radius of the sphere.
Summary Contents of Euclid's Elements   Book  I  II  III  IV  V  VI  VII  VIII  IX  X  XI  XII  XIII  Totals   Definitions  23  2  11  7  18  4  22  –  –  16  28  –  –  131   Postulates  5  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  5   Common Notions  5  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  5   Propositions  48  14  37  16  25  33  39  27  36  115  39  18  18  465  Euclid's method and style of presentation     • "To draw a straight line from any point to any point."
• "To describe a circle with any center and distance."
Euclid, Elements , Book I, Postulates 1 & 3.
An animation showing how Euclid constructed a hexagon (Book IV, Proposition 15).
Every two-dimensional figure in the Elements can be constructed using only a compass and straightedge.
Codex Vaticanus 190  Euclid's axiomatic approach and constructive methods were widely influential.
Many of Euclid's propositions were constructive, demonstrating the existence of some figure by detailing the steps he used to construct the object using a compass and straightedge .
His constructive approach appears even in his geometry's postulates, as the first and third postulates stating the existence of a line and circle are constructive.
Instead of stating that lines and circles exist per his prior definitions, he states that it is possible to 'construct' a line and circle.
It also appears that, for him to use a figure in one of his proofs, he needs to construct it in an earlier proposition.
For example, he proves the Pythagorean theorem by first inscribing a square on the sides of a right triangle, but only after constructing a square on a given line one proposition earlier.
As was common in ancient mathematical texts, when a proposition needed proof in several different cases, Euclid often proved only one of them (often the most difficult), leaving the others to the reader.
Later editors such as Theon often interpolated their own proofs of these cases.
Euclid's presentation was limited by the mathematical ideas and notations in common currency in his era, and this causes the treatment to seem awkward to the modern reader in some places.
For example, there was no notion of an angle greater than two right angles,  the number 1 was sometimes treated separately from other positive integers, and as multiplication was treated geometrically he did not use the product of more than 3 different numbers.
The geometrical treatment of number theory may have been because the alternative would have been the extremely awkward Alexandrian system of numerals .
The presentation of each result is given in a stylized form, which, although not invented by Euclid, is recognized as typically classical.
It has six different parts: First is the 'enunciation', which states the result in general terms (i.e., the statement of the proposition).
Then comes the 'setting-out', which gives the figure and denotes particular geometrical objects by letters.
Next comes the 'definition' or 'specification', which restates the enunciation in terms of the particular figure.
Then the 'construction' or 'machinery' follows.
Here, the original figure is extended to forward the proof.
Then, the 'proof' itself follows.
Finally, the 'conclusion' connects the proof to the enunciation by stating the specific conclusions drawn in the proof, in the general terms of the enunciation.
No indication is given of the method of reasoning that led to the result, although the Data does provide instruction about how to approach the types of problems encountered in the first four books of the Elements .
Some scholars have tried to find fault in Euclid's use of figures in his proofs, accusing him of writing proofs that depended on the specific figures drawn rather than the general underlying logic, especially concerning Proposition II of Book I.
However, Euclid's original proof of this proposition, is general, valid, and does not depend on the figure used as an example to illustrate one given configuration.
Criticism   Euclid's list of axioms in the Elements was not exhaustive, but represented the principles that were the most important.
His proofs often invoke axiomatic notions which were not originally presented in his list of axioms.
Later editors have interpolated Euclid's implicit axiomatic assumptions in the list of formal axioms.
For example, in the first construction of Book 1, Euclid used a premise that was neither postulated nor proved: that two circles with centers at the distance of their radius will intersect in two points.
Later, in the fourth construction, he used superposition (moving the triangles on top of each other) to prove that if two sides and their angles are equal, then they are congruent ; during these considerations he uses some properties of superposition, but these properties are not described explicitly in the treatise.
If superposition is to be considered a valid method of geometric proof, all of geometry would be full of such proofs.
For example, propositions I.2 and I.3 can be proved trivially by using superposition.
Mathematician and historian W.
W.
Rouse Ball put the criticisms in perspective, remarking that "the fact that for two thousand years  was the usual text-book on the subject raises a strong presumption that it is not unsuitable for that purpose."
Apocrypha   It was not uncommon in ancient times to attribute to celebrated authors works that were not written by them.
It is by these means that the apocryphal books XIV and XV of the Elements were sometimes included in the collection.
The spurious Book XIV was probably written by Hypsicles on the basis of a treatise by Apollonius .
The book continues Euclid's comparison of regular solids inscribed in spheres, with the chief result being that the ratio of the surfaces of the dodecahedron and icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere is the same as the ratio of their volumes, the ratio being        10   3  (  5  −    5    )      =      5  +    5     6     .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {\frac {10}{3(5-{\sqrt {5}})}}}={\sqrt {\frac {5+{\sqrt {5}}}{6}}}.}
The spurious Book XV was probably written, at least in part, by Isidore of Miletus .
This book covers topics such as counting the number of edges and solid angles in the regular solids, and finding the measure of dihedral angles of faces that meet at an edge.
Editions   The Italian  Jesuit  Matteo Ricci (left) and the Chinese mathematician Xu Guangqi (right) published the first Chinese edition of Euclid's Elements ( Jīhé yuánběn  幾何原本 ) in 1607.
Proof of the Pythagorean theorem in Byrne 's The Elements of Euclid and published in colored version in 1847.
4th century, Theon of Alexandria , 888 AD manuscript extant.
9th century, Pre-Theon Peyrard Vat.
gr.
190  Many medieval editions, pre 1482  1460s, Regiomontanus (incomplete)  1482, Erhard Ratdolt (Venice), editio princeps (in Latin)    1533, editio princeps of the Greek text by Simon Grynäus   1557, by Jean Magnien and Pierre de Montdoré  , reviewed by Stephanus Gracilis (only propositions, no full proofs, includes original Greek and the Latin translation)  1572, Commandinus Latin edition  1574, Christoph Clavius  1883–1888, Johan Ludvig Heiberg  Translations   English   1570, Henry Billingsley  1651, Thomas Rudd  1660, Isaac Barrow  1661, John Leeke and Geo.
Serle  1685, William Hallifax  1705, Charles Scarborough  1708, John Keill  1714, W.
Whiston  1756, Robert Simson  1781, 1788 James Williamson  1781, William Austin  1795, John Playfair  1826, George Phillips  1828, Dionysius Lardner  1833, Thomas Perronet Thompson  1862, Isaac Todhunter  1908, Thomas Little Heath (revised in 1926) from Johan Ludvig Heiberg 's edition  1939, R.
Catesby Taliaferro  Other languages   1505, Bartolomeo Zamberti  (Latin)  1543, Nicolo Tartaglia (Italian)  1557, Jean Magnien and Pierre de Montdoré, reviewed by Stephanus Gracilis (Greek to Latin)  1558, Johann Scheubel (German)  1562, Jacob Kündig (German)  1562, Wilhelm Holtzmann (German)  1564–1566, Pierre Forcadel  de Béziers (French)  1572, Commandinus (Latin)  1575, Commandinus (Italian)  1576, Rodrigo de Zamorano (Spanish)  1594, Typographia Medicea (edition of the Arabic translation of The Recension of Euclid's "Elements"  )  1604, Jean Errard  de Bar-le-Duc (French)  1606, Jan Pieterszoon Dou (Dutch)  1607, Matteo Ricci , Xu Guangqi (Chinese)  1613, Pietro Cataldi (Italian)  1615, Denis Henrion (French)  1617, Frans van Schooten (Dutch)  1637, L.
Carduchi (Spanish)  1639, Pierre Hérigone (French)  1651, Heinrich Hoffmann (German)  1663, Domenico Magni (Italian from Latin)  1672, Claude François Milliet Dechales (French)  1680, Vitale Giordano (Italian)  1689, Jacob Knesa (Spanish)  1690, Vincenzo Viviani (Italian)  1694, Ant.
Ernst Burkh v.
Pirckenstein (German)  1695, Claes Jansz Vooght (Dutch)  1697, Samuel Reyher (German)  1702, Hendrik Coets (Dutch)  1714, Chr.
Schessler (German)  1720s, Jagannatha Samrat (Sanskrit, based on the Arabic translation of Nasir al-Din al-Tusi)   1731, Guido Grandi (abbreviation to Italian)  1738, Ivan Satarov (Russian from French)  1744, Mårten Strömer (Swedish)  1749, Dechales (Italian)  1749, Methodios Anthrakitis (Μεθόδιος Ανθρακίτης) (Greek)  1745, Ernest Gottlieb Ziegenbalg (Danish)  1752, Leonardo Ximenes (Italian)  1763, Pibo Steenstra (Dutch)  1768, Angelo Brunelli (Portuguese)  1773, 1781, J.
F.
Lorenz (German)  1780, Baruch Schick of Shklov (Hebrew)   1789, Pr.
Suvoroff nad Yos.
Nikitin (Russian from Greek)  1803, H.C. Linderup (Danish)  1804, François Peyrard (French).
Peyrard discovered in 1808 the Vaticanus Graecus 190 , which enables him to provide a first definitive version in 1814–1818  1807, Józef Czech (Polish based on Greek, Latin and English editions)  1807, J.
K.
F.
Hauff (German)  1818, Vincenzo Flauti (Italian)  1820, Benjamin of Lesbos (Modern Greek)  1828, Joh.
Josh and Ign.
Hoffmann (German)  1833, E.
S.
Unger (German)  1836, H.
Falk (Swedish)  1844, 1845, 1859, P.
R.
Bråkenhjelm (Swedish)  1850, F.
A.
A.
Lundgren (Swedish)  1850, H.
A.
Witt and M.
E.
Areskong (Swedish)  1865, Sámuel Brassai (Hungarian)  1873, Masakuni Yamada (Japanese)  1880, Vachtchenko-Zakhartchenko (Russian)  1897, Thyra Eibe (Danish)  1901, Max Simon (German)  1907, František Servít (Czech)   1953, 1958, 1975, Evangelos Stamatis (Ευάγγελος Σταµάτης) (Modern Greek)  1999, Maja Hudoletnjak Grgić (Book I-VI) (Croatian)   2009, Irineu Bicudo ( Portuguese )  2019, Ali Sinan Sertöz (Turkish)   2022, Ján Čižmár (Slovak)  Book I Editions   1886, Euclid Book I Hall & Stevens (English)  1891,1896, The Harpur Euclid by Edward Langley and Seys Phillips (English)  1949, Henry Regnery Company (English)  Selected editions currently in print   Euclid's Elements – All thirteen books complete in one volume , Based on Heath's translation, edited by Dana Densmore, et al.
Green Lion Press ISBN  1-888009-18-7 .
The Elements: Books I–XIII – Complete and Unabridged, (2006) Translated by Sir Thomas Heath, Barnes & Noble ISBN  0-7607-6312-7 .
The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements , translation and commentaries by Heath, Thomas L.
(1956) in three volumes.
Dover Publications.
ISBN  0-486-60088-2 (vol.
1), ISBN  0-486-60089-0 (vol.
2), ISBN  0-486-60090-4 (vol.
3)  Plane Geometry (Euclid's elements Redux) Books I–VI , based on John Casey's translation, edited by Daniel Callahan, ISBN  978-1977730039  Selected editions based on Oliver Byrne's edition   The first six books of the Elements of Euclid , edited by Werner Oechslin, Taschen, 2010, ISBN  3836517752 , a facsimile of Byrne (1847).
Oliver Byrne's Elements of Euclid , Art Meets Science, 2022, ISBN  978-1528770439 , a facsimile of Byrne (1847).
Euclid’s Elements: Completing Oliver Byrne's work , Kronecker Wallis, 2019, a modern redrawing extended to the rest of the Elements , originally launched on Kickstarter .
Free versions   Euclid's Elements Redux, Volume 1 , contains books I–III, based on John Casey's translation.
Euclid's Elements Redux, Volume 2 , contains books IV–VIII, based on John Casey's translation.
Form of reasoning  Deductive reasoning is the mental process of drawing valid inferences .
An inference is valid if its conclusion follows logically from its premises , meaning that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
For example, the inference from the premises "all men are mortal" and " Socrates is a man" to the conclusion "Socrates is mortal" is deductively valid.
An argument is sound if it is valid and all its premises are true.
Some theorists define deduction in terms of the intentions of the author: they have to intend for the premises to offer deductive support to the conclusion.
With the help of this modification, it is possible to distinguish valid from invalid deductive reasoning: it is invalid if the author's belief about the deductive support is false, but even invalid deductive reasoning is a form of deductive reasoning.
Psychology is interested in deductive reasoning as a psychological process, i.e.
how people actually draw inferences.
Logic , on the other hand, focuses on the deductive relation of logical consequence between the premises and the conclusion or how people should draw inferences.
There are different ways of conceptualizing this relation.
According to the semantic approach, an argument is deductively valid if and only if there is no possible interpretation of this argument where its premises are true and its conclusion is false.
The syntactic approach, on the other hand, holds that an argument is deductively valid if and only if its conclusion can be deduced from its premises using a valid rule of inference .
A rule of inference is a schema of drawing a conclusion from a set of premises based only on their logical form .
There are various rules of inference, like the modus ponens and the modus tollens .
Invalid deductive arguments , which do not follow a rule of inference, are called formal fallacies .
Rules of inference are definitory rules and contrast to strategic rules, which specify what inferences one needs to draw in order to arrive at an intended conclusion.
Deductive reasoning contrasts with non-deductive or ampliative reasoning.
For ampliative arguments, like inductive or abductive arguments , the premises offer weaker support to their conclusion: they make it more likely but they do not guarantee its truth.
They make up for this drawback by being able to provide genuinely new information not already found in the premises, unlike deductive arguments.
Cognitive psychology investigates the mental processes responsible for deductive reasoning.
One of its topics concerns the factors determining whether people draw valid or invalid deductive inferences.
One factor is the form of the argument: for example, people are more successful for arguments of the form modus ponens than for modus tollens.
Another is the content of the arguments: people are more likely to believe that an argument is valid if the claim made in its conclusion is plausible.
A general finding is that people tend to perform better for realistic and concrete cases than for abstract cases.
Psychological theories of deductive reasoning aim to explain these findings by providing an account of the underlying psychological processes.
Mental logic theories hold that deductive reasoning is a language -like process that happens through the manipulation of representations using rules of inference.
Mental model theories , on the other hand, claim that deductive reasoning involves models of possible states of the world without the medium of language or rules of inference.
According to dual-process theories of reasoning, there are two qualitatively different cognitive systems responsible for reasoning.
The problem of deductive reasoning is relevant to various fields and issues.
Epistemology tries to understand how justification is transferred from the belief in the premises to the belief in the conclusion in the process of deductive reasoning.
Probability logic studies how the probability of the premises of an inference affects the probability of its conclusion.
The controversial thesis of deductivism denies that there are other correct forms of inference besides deduction.
Natural deduction is a type of proof system based on simple and self-evident rules of inference.
In philosophy , the geometrical method is a way of philosophizing that starts from a small set of self-evident axioms and tries to build a comprehensive logical system using deductive reasoning.
Definition   Deductive reasoning is the psychological process of drawing deductive inferences .
An inference is a set of premises together with a conclusion.
This psychological process starts from the premises and reasons to a conclusion based on and supported by these premises.
If the reasoning was done correctly, it results in a valid deduction: the truth of the premises ensures the truth of the conclusion.
For example, in the syllogistic argument "all frogs are amphibians; no cats are amphibians; therefore, no cats are frogs" the conclusion is true because its two premises are true.
But even arguments with wrong premises can be deductively valid if they obey this principle, as in "all frogs are mammals; no cats are mammals; therefore, no cats are frogs".
If the premises of a valid argument are true, then it is called a sound argument.
The relation between the premises and the conclusion of a deductive argument is usually referred to as " logical consequence ".
According to Alfred Tarski , logical consequence has 3 essential features: it is necessary, formal, and knowable a priori .
It is necessary in the sense that the premises of valid deductive arguments necessitate the conclusion: it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false, independent of any other circumstances.
Logical consequence is formal in the sense that it depends only on the form or the syntax of the premises and the conclusion.
This means that the validity of a particular argument does not depend on the specific contents of this argument.
If it is valid, then any argument with the same logical form is also valid, no matter how different it is on the level of its contents.
Logical consequence is knowable a priori in the sense that no empirical knowledge of the world is necessary to determine whether a deduction is valid.
So it is not necessary to engage in any form of empirical investigation.
Some logicians define deduction in terms of possible worlds : A deductive inference is valid if and only if, there is no possible world in which its conclusion is false while its premises are true.
This means that there are no counterexamples: the conclusion is true in all such cases, not just in most cases.
It has been argued against this and similar definitions that they fail to distinguish between valid and invalid deductive reasoning, i.e.
they leave it open whether there are invalid deductive inferences and how to define them.
Some authors define deductive reasoning in psychological terms in order to avoid this problem.
According to Mark Vorobey, whether an argument is deductive depends on the psychological state of the person making the argument: "An argument is deductive if, and only if, the author of the argument believes that the truth of the premises necessitates (guarantees) the truth of the conclusion".
A similar formulation holds that the speaker claims or intends that the premises offer deductive support for their conclusion.
This is sometimes categorized as a speaker-determined definition of deduction since it depends also on the speaker whether the argument in question is deductive or not.
For speakerless definitions, on the other hand, only the argument itself matters independent of the speaker.
One advantage of this type of formulation is that it makes it possible to distinguish between good or valid and bad or invalid deductive arguments: the argument is good if the author's belief concerning the relation between the premises and the conclusion is true, otherwise it is bad.
One consequence of this approach is that deductive arguments cannot be identified by the law of inference they use.
For example, an argument of the form modus ponens may be non-deductive if the author's beliefs are sufficiently confused.
That brings with it an important drawback of this definition: it is difficult to apply to concrete cases since the intentions of the author are usually not explicitly stated.
Deductive reasoning is studied in logic , psychology , and the cognitive sciences .
Some theorists emphasize in their definition the difference between these fields.
On this view, psychology studies deductive reasoning as an empirical mental process, i.e.
what happens when humans engage in reasoning.
But the descriptive question of how actual reasoning happens is different from the normative question of how it should happen or what constitutes correct deductive reasoning, which is studied by logic.
This is sometimes expressed by stating that, strictly speaking, logic does not study deductive reasoning but the deductive relation between premises and a conclusion known as logical consequence .
But this distinction is not always precisely observed in the academic literature.
One important aspect of this difference is that logic is not interested in whether the conclusion of an argument is sensible.
So from the premise "the printer has ink" one may draw the unhelpful conclusion "the printer has ink and the printer has ink and the printer has ink", which has little relevance from a psychological point of view.
Instead, actual reasoners usually try to remove redundant or irrelevant information and make the relevant information more explicit.
The psychological study of deductive reasoning is also concerned with how good people are at drawing deductive inferences and with the factors determining their performance.
Deductive inferences are found both in natural language and in formal logical systems , such as propositional logic .
Conceptions of deduction   Deductive arguments differ from non-deductive arguments in that the truth of their premises ensures the truth of their conclusion.
There are two important conceptions of what this exactly means.
They are referred to as the syntactic and the semantic approach.
According to the syntactic approach, whether an argument is deductively valid depends only on its form, syntax, or structure.
Two arguments have the same form if they use the same logical vocabulary in the same arrangement, even if their contents differ.
For example, the arguments "if it rains then the street will be wet; it rains; therefore, the street will be wet" and "if the meat is not cooled then it will spoil; the meat is not cooled; therefore, it will spoil" have the same logical form: they follow the modus ponens .
Their form can be expressed more abstractly as "if A then B; A; therefore B" in order to make the common syntax explicit.
There are various other valid logical forms or rules of inference , like modus tollens or the disjunction elimination .
The syntactic approach then holds that an argument is deductively valid if and only if its conclusion can be deduced from its premises using a valid rule of inference.
One difficulty for the syntactic approach is that it is usually necessary to express the argument in a formal language in order to assess whether it is valid.
But since the problem of deduction is also relevant for natural languages , this often brings with it the difficulty of translating the natural language argument into a formal language, a process that comes with various problems of its own.
Another difficulty is due to the fact that the syntactic approach depends on the distinction between formal and non-formal features.
While there is a wide agreement concerning the paradigmatic cases, there are also various controversial cases where it is not clear how this distinction is to be drawn.
The semantic approach suggests an alternative definition of deductive validity.
It is based on the idea that the sentences constituting the premises and conclusions have to be interpreted in order to determine whether the argument is valid.
This means that one ascribes semantic values to the expressions used in the sentences, such as the reference to an object for singular terms or to a truth-value for atomic sentences.
The semantic approach is also referred to as the model-theoretic approach since the branch of mathematics known as model theory is often used to interpret these sentences.
Usually, many different interpretations are possible, such as whether a singular term refers to one object or to another.
According to the semantic approach, an argument is deductively valid if and only if there is no possible interpretation where its premises are true and its conclusion is false.
Some objections to the semantic approach are based on the claim that the semantics of a language cannot be expressed in the same language, i.e.
that a richer metalanguage is necessary.
This would imply that the semantic approach cannot provide a universal account of deduction for language as an all-encompassing medium.
Rules of inference   Deductive reasoning usually happens by applying rules of inference .
A rule of inference is a way or schema of drawing a conclusion from a set of premises.
This happens usually based only on the logical form of the premises.
A rule of inference is valid if, when applied to true premises, the conclusion cannot be false.
A particular argument is valid if it follows a valid rule of inference.
Deductive arguments that do not follow a valid rule of inference are called formal fallacies : the truth of their premises does not ensure the truth of their conclusion.
In some cases, whether a rule of inference is valid depends on the logical system one is using.
The dominant logical system is classical logic and the rules of inference listed here are all valid in classical logic.
But so-called deviant logics provide a different account of which inferences are valid.
For example, the rule of inference known as double negation elimination , i.e.
that if a proposition is not not true then it is also true , is accepted in classical logic but rejected in intuitionistic logic .
Prominent rules of inference   Modus ponens   Main article: Modus ponens  Modus ponens (also known as "affirming the antecedent" or "the law of detachment") is the primary deductive rule of inference .
It applies to arguments that have as first premise a conditional statement (     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   ) and as second premise the antecedent (     P    {\displaystyle P}   ) of the conditional statement.
It obtains the consequent (     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   ) of the conditional statement as its conclusion.
The argument form is listed below:      P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   (First premise is a conditional statement)      P    {\displaystyle P}   (Second premise is the antecedent)      Q    {\displaystyle Q}   (Conclusion deduced is the consequent)  In this form of deductive reasoning, the consequent (     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   ) obtains as the conclusion from the premises of a conditional statement (     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   ) and its antecedent (     P    {\displaystyle P}   ).
However, the antecedent (     P    {\displaystyle P}   ) cannot be similarly obtained as the conclusion from the premises of the conditional statement (     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   ) and the consequent (     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   ).
Such an argument commits the logical fallacy of affirming the consequent .
The following is an example of an argument using modus ponens:  If it is raining, then there are clouds in the sky.
It is raining.
Thus, there are clouds in the sky.
Modus tollens   Main article: Modus tollens  Modus tollens (also known as "the law of contrapositive") is a deductive rule of inference.
It validates an argument that has as premises a conditional statement (formula) and the negation of the consequent (     ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \lnot Q}   ) and as conclusion the negation of the antecedent (     ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot P}   ).
In contrast to modus ponens , reasoning with modus tollens goes in the opposite direction to that of the conditional.
The general expression for modus tollens is the following:      P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   .
(First premise is a conditional statement)      ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \lnot Q}   .
(Second premise is the negation of the consequent)      ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot P}   .
(Conclusion deduced is the negation of the antecedent)  The following is an example of an argument using modus tollens:  If it is raining, then there are clouds in the sky.
There are no clouds in the sky.
Thus, it is not raining.
Hypothetical syllogism   Main article: hypothetical syllogism  A hypothetical syllogism is an inference that takes two conditional statements and forms a conclusion by combining the hypothesis of one statement with the conclusion of another.
Here is the general form:      P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}        Q  →  R    {\displaystyle Q\rightarrow R}    Therefore,     P  →  R    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow R}   .
In there being a subformula in common between the two premises that does not occur in the consequence, this resembles syllogisms in term logic , although it differs in that this subformula is a proposition whereas in Aristotelian logic, this common element is a term and not a proposition.
The following is an example of an argument using a hypothetical syllogism:  If there had been a thunderstorm, it would have rained.
If it had rained, things would have gotten wet.
Thus, if there had been a thunderstorm, things would have gotten wet.
Fallacies   Various formal fallacies have been described.
They are invalid forms of deductive reasoning.
An additional aspect of them is that they appear to be valid on some occasions or on the first impression.
They may thereby seduce people into accepting and committing them.
One type of formal fallacy is affirming the consequent , as in "if John is a bachelor, then he is male; John is male; therefore, John is a bachelor".
This is similar to the valid rule of inference named modus ponens , but the second premise and the conclusion are switched around, which is why it is invalid.
A similar formal fallacy is denying the antecedent , as in "if Othello is a bachelor, then he is male; Othello is not a bachelor; therefore, Othello is not male".
This is similar to the valid rule of inference called modus tollens , the difference being that the second premise and the conclusion are switched around.
Other formal fallacies include affirming a disjunct , denying a conjunct , and the fallacy of the undistributed middle .
All of them have in common that the truth of their premises does not ensure the truth of their conclusion.
But it may still happen by coincidence that both the premises and the conclusion of formal fallacies are true.
Definitory and strategic rules   Rules of inferences are definitory rules: they determine whether an argument is deductively valid or not.
But reasoners are usually not just interested in making any kind of valid argument.
Instead, they often have a specific point or conclusion that they wish to prove or refute.
So given a set of premises, they are faced with the problem of choosing the relevant rules of inference for their deduction to arrive at their intended conclusion.
This issue belongs to the field of strategic rules: the question of which inferences need to be drawn to support one's conclusion.
The distinction between definitory and strategic rules is not exclusive to logic: it is also found in various games.
In chess , for example, the definitory rules state that bishops may only move diagonally while the strategic rules recommend that one should control the center and protect one's king if one intends to win.
In this sense, definitory rules determine whether one plays chess or something else whereas strategic rules determine whether one is a good or a bad chess player.
The same applies to deductive reasoning: to be an effective reasoner involves mastering both definitory and strategic rules.
Validity and soundness   Argument terminology  Deductive arguments are evaluated in terms of their validity and soundness .
An argument is “ valid ” if it is impossible for its premises to be true while its conclusion is false.
In other words, the conclusion must be true if the premises are true.
An argument can be “valid” even if one or more of its premises are false.
An argument is “ sound ” if it is valid and the premises are true.
It is possible to have a deductive argument that is logically valid but is not sound .
Fallacious arguments often take that form.
The following is an example of an argument that is “valid”, but not “sound”:  Everyone who eats carrots is a quarterback.
John eats carrots.
Therefore, John is a quarterback.
The example's first premise is false – there are people who eat carrots who are not quarterbacks – but the conclusion would necessarily be true, if the premises were true.
In other words, it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.
Therefore, the argument is “valid”, but not “sound”.
False generalizations – such as "Everyone who eats carrots is a quarterback" – are often used to make unsound arguments.
The fact that there are some people who eat carrots but are not quarterbacks proves the flaw of the argument.
In this example, the first statement uses categorical reasoning , saying that all carrot-eaters are definitely quarterbacks.
This theory of deductive reasoning – also known as term logic – was developed by Aristotle , but was superseded by propositional (sentential) logic and predicate logic .
Deductive reasoning can be contrasted with inductive reasoning , in regards to validity and soundness.
In cases of inductive reasoning, even though the premises are true and the argument is “valid”, it is possible for the conclusion to be false (determined to be false with a counterexample or other means).
Difference from ampliative reasoning   Deductive reasoning is usually contrasted with non-deductive or ampliative reasoning.
The hallmark of valid deductive inferences is that it is impossible for their premises to be true and their conclusion to be false.
In this way, the premises provide the strongest possible support to their conclusion.
The premises of ampliative inferences also support their conclusion.
But this support is weaker: they are not necessarily truth-preserving.
So even for correct ampliative arguments, it is possible that their premises are true and their conclusion is false.
Two important forms of ampliative reasoning are inductive and abductive reasoning .
Sometimes the term "inductive reasoning" is used in a very wide sense to cover all forms of ampliative reasoning.
However, in a more strict usage, inductive reasoning is just one form of ampliative reasoning.
In the narrow sense, inductive inferences are forms of statistical generalization.
They are usually based on many individual observations that all show a certain pattern.
These observations are then used to form a conclusion either about a yet unobserved entity or about a general law.
For abductive inferences, the premises support the conclusion because the conclusion is the best explanation of why the premises are true.
The support ampliative arguments provide for their conclusion comes in degrees: some ampliative arguments are stronger than others.
This is often explained in terms of probability : the premises make it more likely that the conclusion is true.
Strong ampliative arguments make their conclusion very likely, but not absolutely certain.
An example of ampliative reasoning is the inference from the premise "every raven in a random sample of 3200 ravens is black" to the conclusion "all ravens are black": the extensive random sample makes the conclusion very likely, but it does not exclude that there are rare exceptions.
In this sense, ampliative reasoning is defeasible: it may become necessary to retract an earlier conclusion upon receiving new related information.
Ampliative reasoning is very common in everyday discourse and the sciences .
An important drawback of deductive reasoning is that it does not lead to genuinely new information.
This means that the conclusion only repeats information already found in the premises.
Ampliative reasoning, on the other hand, goes beyond the premises by arriving at genuinely new information.
One difficulty for this characterization is that it makes deductive reasoning appear useless: if deduction is uninformative, it is not clear why people would engage in it and study it.
It has been suggested that this problem can be solved by distinguishing between surface and depth information.
On this view, deductive reasoning is uninformative on the depth level, in contrast to ampliative reasoning.
But it may still be valuable on the surface level by presenting the information in the premises in a new and sometimes surprising way.
A popular misconception of the relation between deduction and induction identifies their difference on the level of particular and general claims.
On this view, deductive inferences start from general premises and draw particular conclusions, while inductive inferences start from particular premises and draw general conclusions.
This idea is often motivated by seeing deduction and induction as two inverse processes that complement each other: deduction is top-down while induction is bottom-up .
But this is a misconception that does not reflect how valid deduction is defined in the field of logic : a deduction is valid if it is impossible for its premises to be true while its conclusion is false, independent of whether the premises or the conclusion are particular or general.
Because of this, some deductive inferences have a general conclusion and some also have particular premises.
In various fields   Cognitive psychology   Cognitive psychology studies the psychological processes responsible for deductive reasoning.
It is concerned, among other things, with how good people are at drawing valid deductive inferences.
This includes the study of the factors affecting their performance, their tendency to commit fallacies , and the underlying biases involved.
A notable finding in this field is that the type of deductive inference has a significant impact on whether the correct conclusion is drawn.
In a meta-analysis of 65 studies, for example, 97% of the subjects evaluated modus ponens inferences correctly, while the success rate for modus tollens was only 72%.
On the other hand, even some fallacies like affirming the consequent or denying the antecedent were regarded as valid arguments by the majority of the subjects.
An important factor for these mistakes is whether the conclusion seems initially plausible: the more believable the conclusion is, the higher the chance that a subject will mistake a fallacy for a valid argument.
An important bias is the matching bias , which is often illustrated using the Wason selection task .
In an often-cited experiment by Peter Wason , 4 cards are presented to the participant.
In one case, the visible sides show the symbols D, K, 3, and 7 on the different cards.
The participant is told that every card has a letter on one side and a number on the other side, and that "very card which has a D on one side has a 3 on the other side".
Their task is to identify which cards need to be turned around in order to confirm or refute this conditional claim.
The correct answer, only given by about 10%, is the cards D and 7.
Many select card 3 instead, even though the conditional claim does not involve any requirements on what symbols can be found on the opposite side of card 3.
But this result can be drastically changed if different symbols are used: the visible sides show "drinking a beer", "drinking a coke", "16 years of age", and "22 years of age" and the participants are asked to evaluate the claim "f a person is drinking beer, then the person must be over 19 years of age".
In this case, 74% of the participants identified correctly that the cards "drinking a beer" and "16 years of age" have to be turned around.
These findings suggest that the deductive reasoning ability is heavily influenced by the content of the involved claims and not just by the abstract logical form of the task: the more realistic and concrete the cases are, the better the subjects tend to perform.
Another bias is called the "negative conclusion bias", which happens when one of the premises has the form of a negative material conditional ,    as in "If the card does not have an A on the left, then it has a 3 on the right.
The card does not have a 3 on the right.
Therefore, the card has an A on the left".
The increased tendency to misjudge the validity of this type of argument is not present for positive material conditionals, as in "If the card has an A on the left, then it has a 3 on the right.
Therefore, the card does not have an A on the left".
Psychological theories of deductive reasoning   Various psychological theories of deductive reasoning have been proposed.
These theories aim to explain how deductive reasoning works in relation to the underlying psychological processes responsible.
They are often used to explain the empirical findings, such as why human reasoners are more susceptible to some types of fallacies than to others.
An important distinction is between mental logic theories , sometimes also referred to as rule theories , and mental model theories .
Mental logic theories see deductive reasoning as a language -like process that happens through the manipulation of representations.
This is done by applying syntactic rules of inference in a way very similar to how systems of natural deduction transform their premises to arrive at a conclusion.
On this view, some deductions are simpler than others since they involve fewer inferential steps.
This idea can be used, for example, to explain why humans have more difficulties with some deductions, like the modus tollens , than with others, like the modus ponens : because the more error-prone forms do not have a native rule of inference but need to be calculated by combining several inferential steps with other rules of inference.
In such cases, the additional cognitive labor makes the inferences more open to error.
Mental model theories , on the other hand, hold that deductive reasoning involves models or mental representations of possible states of the world without the medium of language or rules of inference.
In order to assess whether a deductive inference is valid, the reasoner mentally constructs models that are compatible with the premises of the inference.
The conclusion is then tested by looking at these models and trying to find a counterexample in which the conclusion is false.
The inference is valid if no such counterexample can be found.
In order to reduce cognitive labor, only such models are represented in which the premises are true.
Because of this, the evaluation of some forms of inference only requires the construction of very few models while for others, many different models are necessary.
In the latter case, the additional cognitive labor required makes deductive reasoning more error-prone, thereby explaining the increased rate of error observed.
This theory can also explain why some errors depend on the content rather than the form of the argument.
For example, when the conclusion of an argument is very plausible, the subjects may lack the motivation to search for counterexamples among the constructed models.
Both mental logic theories and mental model theories assume that there is one general-purpose reasoning mechanism that applies to all forms of deductive reasoning.
But there are also alternative accounts that posit various different special-purpose reasoning mechanisms for different contents and contexts.
In this sense, it has been claimed that humans possess a special mechanism for permissions and obligations, specifically for detecting cheating in social exchanges.
This can be used to explain why humans are often more successful in drawing valid inferences if the contents involve human behavior in relation to social norms.
Another example is the so-called dual-process theory .
This theory posits that there are two distinct cognitive systems responsible for reasoning.
Their interrelation can be used to explain commonly observed biases in deductive reasoning.
System 1 is the older system in terms of evolution.
It is based on associative learning and happens fast and automatically without demanding many cognitive resources.
System 2, on the other hand, is of more recent evolutionary origin.
It is slow and cognitively demanding, but also more flexible and under deliberate control.
The dual-process theory posits that system 1 is the default system guiding most of our everyday reasoning in a pragmatic way.
But for particularly difficult problems on the logical level, system 2 is employed.
System 2 is mostly responsible for deductive reasoning.
Intelligence   The ability of deductive reasoning is an important aspect of intelligence and many tests of intelligence include problems that call for deductive inferences.
Because of this relation to intelligence, deduction is highly relevant to psychology and the cognitive sciences.
But the subject of deductive reasoning is also pertinent to the computer sciences , for example, in the creation of artificial intelligence .
Epistemology   Deductive reasoning plays an important role in epistemology .
Epistemology is concerned with the question of justification , i.e.
to point out which beliefs are justified and why.
Deductive inferences are able to transfer the justification of the premises onto the conclusion.
So while logic is interested in the truth-preserving nature of deduction, epistemology is interested in the justification-preserving nature of deduction.
There are different theories trying to explain why deductive reasoning is justification-preserving.
According to reliabilism , this is the case because deductions are truth-preserving: they are reliable processes that ensure a true conclusion given the premises are true.
Some theorists hold that the thinker has to have explicit awareness of the truth-preserving nature of the inference for the justification to be transferred from the premises to the conclusion.
One consequence of such a view is that, for young children, this deductive transference does not take place since they lack this specific awareness.
Probability logic   Probability logic is interested in how the probability of the premises of an argument affects the probability of its conclusion.
It differs from classical logic, which assumes that propositions are either true or false but does not take into consideration the probability or certainty that a proposition is true or false.
The probability of the conclusion of a deductive argument cannot be calculated by figuring out the cumulative probability of the argument's premises.
Dr. Timothy McGrew , a specialist in the applications of probability theory , and Dr. Ernest W.
Adams, a Professor Emeritus at UC Berkeley , pointed out that the theorem on the accumulation of uncertainty designates only a lower limit on the probability of the conclusion.
So the probability of the conjunction of the argument's premises sets only a minimum probability of the conclusion.
The probability of the argument's conclusion cannot be any lower than the probability of the conjunction of the argument's premises.
For example, if the probability of a deductive argument's four premises is ~0.43, then it is assured that the probability of the argument's conclusion is no less than ~0.43.
It could be much higher, but it cannot drop under that lower limit.
There can be examples in which each single premise is more likely true than not and yet it would be unreasonable to accept the conjunction of the premises.
Professor Henry Kyburg , who was known for his work in probability and logic , clarified that the issue here is one of closure – specifically, closure under conjunction.
There are examples where it is reasonable to accept P and reasonable to accept Q without its being reasonable to accept the conjunction (P&Q).
Lotteries serve as very intuitive examples of this, because in a basic non-discriminatory finite lottery with only a single winner to be drawn, it is sound to think that ticket 1 is a loser, sound to think that ticket 2 is a loser,...all the way up to the final number.
However, clearly, it is irrational to accept the conjunction of these statements; the conjunction would deny the very terms of the lottery because (taken with the background knowledge) it would entail that there is no winner.
Dr. McGrew further adds that the sole method to ensure that a conclusion deductively drawn from a group of premises is more probable than not is to use premises the conjunction of which is more probable than not.
This point is slightly tricky, because it can lead to a possible misunderstanding.
What is being searched for is a general principle that specifies factors under which, for any logical consequence C of the group of premises, C is more probable than not.
Particular consequences will differ in their probability.
However, the goal is to state a condition under which this attribute is ensured, regardless of which consequence one draws, and fulfilment of that condition is required to complete the task.
This principle can be demonstrated in a moderately clear way.
Suppose, for instance, the following group of premises: {P, Q, R} Suppose that the conjunction ((P & Q) & R) fails to be more probable than not.
Then there is at least one logical consequence of the group that fails to be more probable than not – namely, that very conjunction.
So it is an essential factor for the argument to “preserve plausibility” (Dr. McGrew coins this phrase to mean “guarantee, from information about the plausibility of the premises alone, that any conclusion drawn from those premises by deductive inference is itself more plausible than not”) that the conjunction of the premises be more probable than not.
History   This section needs expansion .
You can help by adding to it .
( January 2015 )  Aristotle , a Greek philosopher , started documenting deductive reasoning in the 4th century BC.
René Descartes , in his book Discourse on Method , refined the idea for the Scientific Revolution .
Developing four rules to follow for proving an idea deductively, Descartes laid the foundation for the deductive portion of the scientific method .
Descartes' background in geometry and mathematics influenced his ideas on the truth and reasoning, causing him to develop a system of general reasoning now used for most mathematical reasoning.
Similar to postulates, Descartes believed that ideas could be self-evident and that reasoning alone must prove that observations are reliable.
These ideas also lay the foundations for the ideas of rationalism .
Related concepts and theories   Deductivism   Deductivism is a philosophical position that gives primacy to deductive reasoning or arguments over their non-deductive counterparts.
It is often understood as the evaluative claim that only deductive inferences are good or correct inferences.
This theory would have wide-reaching consequences for various fields since it implies that the rules of deduction are "the only acceptable standard of evidence ".
This way, the rationality or correctness of the different forms of inductive reasoning is denied.
Some forms of deductivism express this in terms of degrees of reasonableness or probability.
Inductive inferences are usually seen as providing a certain degree of support for their conclusion: they make it more likely that their conclusion is true.
Deductivism states that such inferences are not rational: the premises either ensure their conclusion, as in deductive reasoning, or they do not provide any support at all.
One motivation for deductivism is the problem of induction introduced by David Hume .
It consists in the challenge of explaining how or whether inductive inferences based on past experiences support conclusions about future events.
For example, a chicken comes to expect, based on all its past experiences, that the person entering its coop is going to feed it, until one day the person "at last wrings its neck instead".
According to Karl Popper 's falsificationism, deductive reasoning alone is sufficient.
This is due to its truth-preserving nature: a theory can be falsified if one of its deductive consequences is false.
So while inductive reasoning does not offer positive evidence for a theory, the theory still remains a viable competitor until falsified by empirical observation .
In this sense, deduction alone is sufficient for discriminating between competing hypotheses about what is the case.
Hypothetico-deductivism is a closely related scientific method, according to which science progresses by formulating hypotheses and then aims to falsify them by trying to make observations that run counter to their deductive consequences.
Natural deduction   The term " natural deduction " refers to a class of proof systems based on self-evident rules of inference.
The first systems of natural deduction were developed by Gerhard Gentzen and Stanislaw Jaskowski in the 1930s.
The core motivation was to give a simple presentation of deductive reasoning that closely mirrors how reasoning actually takes place.
In this sense, natural deduction stands in contrast to other less intuitive proof systems, such as Hilbert-style deductive systems , which employ axiom schemes to express logical truths .
Natural deduction, on the other hand, avoids axioms schemes by including many different rules of inference that can be used to formulate proofs.
These rules of inference express how logical constants behave.
They are often divided into introduction rules and elimination rules .
Introduction rules specify under which conditions a logical constant may be introduced into a new sentence of the proof .
For example, the introduction rule for the logical constant "     ∧    {\displaystyle \land }   " (and) is "        A  ,  B    (  A  ∧  B  )       {\displaystyle {\frac {A,B}{(A\land B)}}}   " .
It expresses that, given the premises "     A    {\displaystyle A}   " and "     B    {\displaystyle B}   " individually, one may draw the conclusion "     A  ∧  B    {\displaystyle A\land B}   " and thereby include it in one's proof.
This way, the symbol "     ∧    {\displaystyle \land }   " is introduced into the proof.
The removal of this symbol is governed by other rules of inference, such as the elimination rule "        (  A  ∧  B  )   A      {\displaystyle {\frac {(A\land B)}{A}}}   " , which states that one may deduce the sentence "     A    {\displaystyle A}   " from the premise "     (  A  ∧  B  )    {\displaystyle (A\land B)}   " .
Similar introduction and elimination rules are given for other logical constants, such as the propositional operator "     ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   " , the propositional connectives  "     ∨    {\displaystyle \lor }   " and "     →    {\displaystyle \rightarrow }   " , and the quantifiers  "     ∃    {\displaystyle \exists }   " and "     ∀    {\displaystyle \forall }   " .
The focus on rules of inferences instead of axiom schemes is an important feature of natural deduction.
But there is no general agreement on how natural deduction is to be defined.
Some theorists hold that all proof systems with this feature are forms of natural deduction.
This would include various forms of sequent calculi  or tableau calculi .
But other theorists use the term in a more narrow sense, for example, to refer to the proof systems developed by Gentzen and Jaskowski.
Because of its simplicity, natural deduction is often used for teaching logic to students.
Geometrical method   The geometrical method is a method of philosophy based on deductive reasoning.
It starts from a small set of self-evident axioms and tries to build a comprehensive logical system based only on deductive inferences from these first axioms .
It was initially formulated by Baruch Spinoza and came to prominence in various rationalist philosophical systems in the modern era.
It gets its name from the forms of mathematical demonstration found in traditional geometry , which are usually based on axioms, definitions , and inferred theorems .
An important motivation of the geometrical method is to repudiate philosophical skepticism by grounding one's philosophical system on absolutely certain axioms.
Deductive reasoning is central to this endeavor because of its necessarily truth-preserving nature.
This way, the certainty initially invested only in the axioms is transferred to all parts of the philosophical system.
One recurrent criticism of philosophical systems build using the geometrical method is that their initial axioms are not as self-evident or certain as their defenders proclaim.
This problem lies beyond the deductive reasoning itself, which only ensures that the conclusion is true if the premises are true, but not that the premises themselves are true.
For example, Spinoza's philosophical system has been criticized this way based on objections raised against the causal axiom, i.e.
that "the knowledge of an effect depends on and involves knowledge of its cause".
A different criticism targets not the premises but the reasoning itself, which may at times implicitly assume premises that are themselves not self-evident.
Argument–deduction–proof distinctions originated with logic itself.
Naturally, the terminology evolved.
Argument  An argument , more fully a premise–conclusion argument, is a two-part system composed of premises and conclusion.
An argument is valid  if and only if its conclusion is a consequence of its premises.
Every premise set has infinitely many consequences each giving rise to a valid argument.
Some consequences are obviously so, but most are not: most are hidden consequences.
Most valid arguments are not yet known to be valid.
To determine validity in non-obvious cases deductive reasoning is required.
There is no deductive reasoning in an argument per se ; such must come from the outside.
Every argument's conclusion is a premise of other arguments.
The word constituent may be used for either a premise or conclusion.
In the context of this article and in most classical contexts, all candidates for consideration as argument constituents fall under the category of truth-bearer : propositions, statements, sentences, judgments, etc.
Deduction  A deduction is a three-part system composed of premises, a conclusion, and chain of intermediates – steps of reasoning showing that its conclusion is a consequence of its premises.
The reasoning in a deduction is by definition cogent.
Such reasoning itself, or the chain of intermediates representing it, has also been called an argument, more fully a deductive argument .
In many cases, an argument can be known to be valid by means of a deduction of its conclusion from its premises but non-deductive methods such as Venn diagrams and other graphic procedures have been proposed.
Proof  A proof is a deduction whose premises are known truths.
A proof of the Pythagorean theorem is a deduction that might use several premises – axioms , postulates, and definitions – and contain dozens of intermediate steps.
As Alfred Tarski famously emphasized in accord with Aristotle , truths can be known by proof but proofs presuppose truths not known by proof.
Comparison  Premise-conclusion arguments do not require or produce either knowledge of validity or knowledge of truth.
Premise sets may be chosen arbitrarily and conclusions may be chosen arbitrarily.
Deductions require knowing how to reason but they do not require knowledge of truth of their premises.
Deductions produce knowledge of the validity of arguments but ordinarily they do not produce knowledge of the truth of their conclusions.
Proofs require knowledge of the truth of their premises, they require knowledge of deductive reasoning, and they produce knowledge of their conclusions.
Context  Modern logicians disagree concerning the nature of argument constituents.
Quine devotes the first chapter of Philosophy of Logic to this issue.
Historians have not even been able to agree on what Aristotle took as constituents.
Argument–deduction–proof distinctions are inseparable from what have been called the consequence–deducibility distinction and the truth-and-consequence conception of proof .
Variations among argument–deduction–proof distinctions are not all terminological.
Logician Alonzo Church  never used the word argument in the above sense and had no synonym.
Church never explained that deduction is the process of producing knowledge of consequence and it never used the common noun deduction for an application of the deduction process.
His primary focus in discussing proof was "conviction" produced by generation of chains of logical truths – not the much more widely applicable and more familiar general process of demonstration as found in pre-Aristotelian geometry and discussed by Aristotle.
He did discuss deductions in the above sense but not by that name: he called them awkwardly “proofs from premises” – an expression he coined for the purpose.
The absence of argument–deduction–proof distinctions is entirely consonant with Church's avowed Platonistic logicism.
Following Dummett's insightful remarks  about Frege , which – mutatis mutandis – apply even more to Church, it might be possible to explain the today-surprising absence.
References    ^ a  b  c   Corcoran, John (2009).
"Aristotle's Demonstrative Logic".
History and Philosophy of Logic .
30 : 1–20.
CiteSeerX  10.1.1.650.463 .
doi : 10.1080/01445340802228362 .
S2CID  8514675 .
^  Willard Quine, Philosophy of logic , Harvard, 1970/1986.
^  John Corcoran, Aristotle's syllogistic premises.
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic.
18 (2012) 300–1.
^   Church, Alonzo (1956).
Introduction to Mathematical Logic .
Princeton University Press.
ISBN  9780691029061 .
^  Dummett, Michael (1973).
Frege: Philosophy of Language .
Harvard University Press.
432ff.
ISBN  9780060111328 .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Argument–deduction–proof_distinctions&oldid=1056712795 "Bearer of truth or falsity  This article is about the term in philosophy.
For a theorem of lesser importance, see Proposition (mathematics) .
For other uses, see Proposition (disambiguation) .
Not to be confused with preposition .
This article needs additional citations for verification .
Find sources:  "Proposition" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  A proposition is a central concept in the philosophy of language , semantics , logic , and related fields, often characterized as the primary bearer of truth or falsity .
Propositions are also often characterized as being the kind of thing that declarative sentences  denote .
For instance the sentence "The sky is blue" denotes the proposition that the sky is blue.
However, crucially, propositions are not themselves linguistic expressions .
For instance, the English sentence "Snow is white" denotes the same proposition as the German sentence "Schnee ist weiß" even though the two sentences are not the same.
Similarly, propositions can also be characterized as the objects of belief and other propositional attitudes .
For instance if one believes that the sky is blue, what one believes is the proposition that the sky is blue.
A proposition can also be thought of as a kind of idea : Collins Dictionary has a definition for proposition as "a statement or an idea that people can consider or discuss whether it is true."
Formally, propositions are often modeled as functions which map a possible world to a truth value .
For instance, the proposition that the sky is blue can be modeled as a function which would return the truth value     T    {\displaystyle T}   if given the actual world as input, but would return     F    {\displaystyle F}   if given some alternate world where the sky is green.
However, a number of alternative formalizations have been proposed, notably the structured propositions view.
Propositions have played a large role throughout the history of logic , linguistics , philosophy of language , and related disciplines.
Some researchers have doubted whether a consistent definition of propositionhood is possible, David Lewis even remarking that "the conception we associate with the word ‘proposition’ may be something of a jumble of conflicting desiderata".
The term is often used broadly and has been used to refer to various related concepts.
Historical usage   By Aristotle   Aristotelian logic identifies a categorical proposition as a sentence which affirms or denies a predicate of a subject , optionally with the help of a copula .
An Aristotelian proposition may take the form of "All men are mortal" or "Socrates is a man."
In the first example, the subject is "men", predicate is "mortal" and copula is "are", while in the second example, the subject is "Socrates", the predicate is "a man" and copula is "is".
By the logical positivists   Often, propositions are related to closed formulae (or logical sentence) to distinguish them from what is expressed by an open formula .
In this sense, propositions are "statements" that are truth-bearers .
This conception of a proposition was supported by the philosophical school of logical positivism .
Some philosophers argue that some (or all) kinds of speech or actions besides the declarative ones also have propositional content.
For example, yes–no questions present propositions, being inquiries into the truth value of them.
On the other hand, some signs can be declarative assertions of propositions, without forming a sentence nor even being linguistic (e.g.
traffic signs convey definite meaning which is either true or false).
Propositions are also spoken of as the content of beliefs and similar intentional attitudes , such as desires, preferences, and hopes.
For example,  "I desire that I have a new car ", or "I wonder whether it will snow " (or, whether it is the case that "it will snow").
Desire, belief, doubt, and so on, are thus called propositional attitudes when they take this sort of content.
By Russell   Bertrand Russell held that propositions were structured entities with objects and properties as constituents.
One important difference between Ludwig Wittgenstein 's view (according to which a proposition is the set of possible worlds /states of affairs in which it is true) is that on the Russellian account, two propositions that are true in all the same states of affairs can still be differentiated.
For instance, the proposition "two plus two equals four" is distinct on a Russellian account from the proposition "three plus three equals six".
If propositions are sets of possible worlds, however, then all mathematical truths (and all other necessary truths) are the same set (the set of all possible worlds).
Relation to the mind   In relation to the mind, propositions are discussed primarily as they fit into propositional attitudes .
Propositional attitudes are simply attitudes characteristic of folk psychology (belief, desire, etc.)
that one can take toward a proposition (e.g.
'it is raining,' 'snow is white,' etc.).
In English, propositions usually follow folk psychological attitudes by a "that clause" (e.g.
"Jane believes that it is raining").
In philosophy of mind and psychology , mental states are often taken to primarily consist in propositional attitudes.
The propositions are usually said to be the "mental content" of the attitude.
For example, if Jane has a mental state of believing that it is raining, her mental content is the proposition 'it is raining.'
Furthermore, since such mental states are about something (namely, propositions), they are said to be intentional mental states.
Explaining the relation of propositions to the mind is especially difficult for non-mentalist views of propositions, such as those of the logical positivists and Russell described above, and Gottlob Frege 's view that propositions are Platonist entities, that is, existing in an abstract, non-physical realm.
So some recent views of propositions have taken them to be mental.
Although propositions cannot be particular thoughts since those are not shareable, they could be types of cognitive events  or properties of thoughts (which could be the same across different thinkers).
Philosophical debates surrounding propositions as they relate to propositional attitudes have also recently centered on whether they are internal or external to the agent, or whether they are mind-dependent or mind-independent entities.
For more, see the entry on internalism and externalism in philosophy of mind.
Treatment in logic   Aristotelian logic   As noted above, in Aristotelian logic a proposition is a particular kind of sentence (a declarative sentence ) that affirms or denies a predicate of a subject , optionally with the help of a copula .
Aristotelian propositions take forms like "All men are mortal" and "Socrates is a man."
Syntactic characterization   In modern logic, the term "proposition" is often used for sentences of a formal language.
In this usage, propositions are formal syntactic objects which can be studied independently of the meaning they would receive from a semantics .
Propositions are also called sentences, statements, statement forms, formulas, and well-formed formulas , though these terms are usually not synonymous within a single text.
A formal language begins with different types of symbols.
These types can include variables , operators , function symbols , predicate (or relation) symbols , quantifiers , and propositional constants .
(Grouping symbols such as delimiters are often added for convenience in using the language, but do not play a logical role.)
Symbols are concatenated together according to recursive rules, in order to construct strings to which truth-values will be assigned.
The rules specify how the operators, function and predicate symbols, and quantifiers are to be concatenated with other strings.
A proposition is then a string with a specific form.
The form that a proposition takes depends on the type of logic.
The type of logic called propositional, sentential, or statement logic includes only operators and propositional constants as symbols in its language.
The propositions in this language are propositional constants, which are considered atomic propositions, and composite (or compound) propositions,  which are composed by recursively applying operators to propositions.
Application here is simply a short way of saying that the corresponding concatenation rule has been applied.
The types of logics called predicate, quantificational, or n -order logic include variables, operators, predicate and function symbols, and quantifiers as symbols in their languages.
The propositions in these logics are more complex.
First, one typically starts by defining a term as follows:  A variable, or  A function symbol applied to the number of terms required by the function symbol's arity .
For example, if + is a binary function symbol and x , y , and z are variables, then x +( y + z ) is a term, which might be written with the symbols in various orders.
Once a term is defined, a proposition can then be defined as follows:  A predicate symbol applied to the number of terms required by its arity, or  An operator applied to the number of propositions required by its arity, or  A quantifier applied to a proposition.
For example, if = is a binary predicate symbol and ∀ is a quantifier, then ∀ x , y , z  is a proposition.
This more complex structure of propositions allows these logics to make finer distinctions between inferences, i.e., to have greater expressive power.
Semantic characterization   Propositions are standardly understood semantically as indicator functions that take a possible world and return a truth value.
For example, the proposition that the sky is blue could be represented as a function     f    {\displaystyle f}   such that     f  (  w  )  =  T    {\displaystyle f(w)=T}   for every world     w  ,    {\displaystyle w,}   if any, where the sky is blue, and     f  (  v  )  =  F    {\displaystyle f(v)=F}   for every world     v  ,    {\displaystyle v,}   if any, where it is not.
A proposition can be modeled equivalently with the inverse image of     T    {\displaystyle T}   under the indicator function, which is sometimes called the characteristic set of the proposition.
For instance, if     w    {\displaystyle w}   and      w  ′     {\displaystyle w'}   are the only worlds in which the sky is blue, the proposition that the sky is blue could be modeled as the set     {  w  ,   w  ′   }    {\displaystyle \{w,w'\}}   .
Numerous refinements and alternative notions of proposition-hood have been proposed including inquisitive propositions and structured propositions .
Propositions are called structured propositions if they have constituents, in some broad sense.
Assuming a structured view of propositions, one can distinguish between singular propositions (also Russellian propositions , named after Bertrand Russell ) which are about a particular individual, general propositions , which are not about any particular individual, and particularized propositions , which are about a particular individual but do not contain that individual as a constituent.
Objections to propositions   Attempts to provide a workable definition of proposition include the following:   Two meaningful declarative sentences express the same proposition, if and only if they mean the same thing.
which defines proposition in terms of synonymity.
For example, "Snow is white" (in English) and "Schnee ist weiß" (in German) are different sentences, but they say the same thing, so they express the same proposition.
Another definition of proposition is:   Two meaningful declarative sentence-tokens express the same proposition, if and only if they mean the same thing.
The above definitions can result in two identical sentences/sentence-tokens appearing to have the same meaning, and thus expressing the same proposition and yet having different truth-values, as in "I am Spartacus" said by Spartacus and said by John Smith, and "It is Wednesday" said on a Wednesday and on a Thursday.
These examples reflect the problem of ambiguity in common language, resulting in a mistaken equivalence of the statements.
“I am Spartacus” spoken by Spartacus is the declaration that the individual speaking is called Spartacus and it is true.
When spoken by John Smith, it is a declaration about a different speaker and it is false.
The term “I” means different things, so “I am Spartacus” means different things.
A related problem is when identical sentences have the same truth-value, yet express different propositions.
The sentence “I am a philosopher” could have been spoken by both Socrates and Plato.
In both instances, the statement is true, but means something different.
These problems are addressed in predicate logic by using a variable for the problematic term, so that “X is a philosopher” can have Socrates or Plato substituted for X, illustrating that “Socrates is a philosopher” and “Plato is a philosopher” are different propositions.
Similarly, “I am Spartacus” becomes “X is Spartacus”, where X is replaced with terms representing the individuals Spartacus and John Smith.
In other words, the example problems can be averted if sentences are formulated with precision such that their terms have unambiguous meanings.
A number of philosophers and linguists claim that all definitions of a proposition are too vague to be useful.
For them, it is just a misleading concept that should be removed from philosophy and semantics .
W.
V.
Quine , who granted the existence of sets in mathematics,  maintained that the indeterminacy of translation prevented any meaningful discussion of propositions, and that they should be discarded in favor of sentences.
P.
F.
Strawson , on the other hand, advocated for the use of the term " statement ".
Study of correct reasoning  This article is about the study of correct reasoning.
For other uses, see Logic (disambiguation) and Logician (disambiguation) .
"Logical" and "Logically" redirect here.
For the rapper, see Logic (rapper) .
For the British company, see Logically (company) .
Logic studies valid forms of inference like modus ponens .
Part of a series on Philosophy    Philosophy portal  Contents  Outline  Lists  Glossary  History  Categories  Disambiguation   Philosophies  By period  Ancient  Ancient Egyptian  Ancient Greek  Medieval  Renaissance  Modern  Contemporary  Analytic  Continental   By region  African  Egypt  Ethiopia  South Africa  Eastern philosophy  Chinese  Indian  Indonesia  Japan  Korea  Vietnam  Indigenous American  Aztec philosophy  Middle Eastern philosophy  Iranian  Western  American  British  French  German  Italian  Russian   By religion  Buddhist  Confucian  Christian  Hindu  Islamic  Jain  Jewish  Taoist    Branches  Epistemology  Ethics  Logic  Metaphysics   Aesthetics  Education  History  Language  Law  Metaphilosophy  Mind  Ontology  Phenomenology  Political  Religion  Science   Philosophers  Aestheticians  Epistemologists  Ethicists  Logicians  Metaphysicians  Philosophers of mind  Social and political philosophers  Women in philosophy  v t e  Logic is the study of correct reasoning .
It includes both formal and informal logic .
Formal logic is the science of deductively valid inferences or logical truths .
It studies how conclusions follow from premises due to the structure of arguments alone, independent of their topic and content.
Informal logic is associated with informal fallacies , critical thinking , and argumentation theory .
It examines arguments expressed in natural language while formal logic uses formal language .
When used as a countable noun, the term "a logic" refers to a logical formal system that articulates a proof system .
Logic plays a central role in many fields, such as philosophy , mathematics , computer science , and linguistics .
Logic studies arguments, which consist of a set of premises together with a conclusion.
An example is the argument from the premises "it's Sunday" and "if it's Sunday then I don't have to work" to the conclusion "I don't have to work".
Premises and conclusions express propositions or claims that can be true or false.
An important feature of propositions is their internal structure.
For example, complex propositions are made up of simpler propositions linked by logical vocabulary like     ∧    {\displaystyle \land }   (and) or     →    {\displaystyle \to }   (if...then).
Simple propositions also have parts, like "Sunday" or "work" in the example.
The truth of a proposition usually depends on the meanings of all of its parts.
However, this is not the case for logically true propositions.
They are true only because of their logical structure independent of the specific meanings of the individual parts.
Arguments can be either correct or incorrect.
An argument is correct if its premises support its conclusion.
Deductive arguments have the strongest form of support: if their premises are true then their conclusion must also be true.
This is not the case for ampliative arguments, which arrive at genuinely new information not found in the premises.
Many arguments in everyday discourse and the sciences are ampliative arguments.
They are divided into inductive and abductive arguments.
Inductive arguments are statistical generalizations, such as inferring that all ravens are black based on many individual observations of black ravens.
Abductive arguments are inferences to the best explanation, for example, when a doctor concludes that a patient has a certain disease which explains the symptoms they suffer.
Arguments that fall short of the standards of correct reasoning often embody fallacies .
Systems of logic are theoretical frameworks for assessing the correctness of arguments.
Logic has been studied since antiquity .
Early approaches include Aristotelian logic , Stoic logic , Nyaya , and Mohism .
Aristotelian logic focuses on reasoning in the form of syllogisms .
It was considered the main system of logic in the Western world until it was replaced by modern formal logic, which has its roots in the work of late 19th-century mathematicians such as Gottlob Frege .
Today, the most used system is classical logic .
It consists of propositional logic and first-order logic .
Propositional logic only considers logical relations between full propositions.
First-order logic also takes the internal parts of propositions into account, like predicates and quantifiers .
Extended logics accept the basic intuitions behind classical logic and extend it to other fields, such as metaphysics , ethics , and epistemology .
Deviant logics, on the other hand, reject certain classical intuitions and provide alternative explanations of the basic laws of logic.
Definition   The word "logic" originates from the Greek word "logos", which has a variety of translations, such as reason , discourse , or language .
Logic is traditionally defined as the study of the laws of thought or correct reasoning ,  and is usually understood in terms of inferences or arguments .
Reasoning is the activity of drawing inferences.
Arguments are the outward expression of inferences.
An argument is a set of premises together with a conclusion.
Logic is interested in whether arguments are correct, i.e.
whether their premises support the conclusion.
These general characterizations apply to logic in the widest sense, i.e., to both formal and informal logic since they are both concerned with assessing the correctness of arguments.
Formal logic is the traditionally dominant field, and some logicians restrict logic to formal logic.
Formal logic   Further information: Formal system  Formal logic is also known as symbolic logic and is widely used in mathematical logic .
It uses a formal approach to study reasoning: it replaces concrete expressions with abstract symbols to examine the logical form of arguments independent of their concrete content.
In this sense, it is topic-neutral since it is only concerned with the abstract structure of arguments and not with their concrete content.
Formal logic is interested in deductively valid arguments, for which the truth of their premises ensures the truth of their conclusion.
This means that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
For valid arguments, the logical structure of the premises and the conclusion follows a pattern called a rule of inference .
For example, modus ponens is a rule of inference according to which all arguments of the form "(1) p , (2) if p then q , (3) therefore q " are valid, independent of what the terms p and q stand for.
In this sense, formal logic can be defined as the science of valid inferences.
An alternative definition sees logic as the study of logical truths .
A proposition is logically true if its truth depends only on the logical vocabulary used in it.
This means that it is true in all possible worlds and under all interpretations of its non-logical terms, like the claim "either it is raining, or it is not".
These two definitions of formal logic are not identical, but they are closely related.
For example, if the inference from p to q is deductively valid then the claim "if p then q " is a logical truth.
Formal logic needs to translate natural language arguments into a formal language, like first-order logic, to assess whether they are valid.
In this example, the letter "c" represents Carmen while the letters "M" and "T" stand for "Mexican" and "teacher".
The symbol "∧" has the meaning of "and".
Formal logic uses formal languages to express and analyze arguments.
They normally have a very limited vocabulary and exact syntactic rules .
These rules specify how their symbols can be combined to construct sentences, so-called well-formed formulas .
This simplicity and exactness of formal logic make it capable of formulating precise rules of inference.
They determine whether a given argument is valid.
Because of the reliance on formal language, natural language arguments cannot be studied directly.
Instead, they need to be translated into formal language before their validity can be assessed.
The term "logic" can also be used in a slightly different sense as a countable noun.
In this sense, a logic is a logical formal system.
Distinct logics differ from each other concerning the rules of inference they accept as valid and the formal languages used to express them.
Starting in the late 19th century, many new formal systems have been proposed.
There are disagreements about what makes a formal system a logic.
For example, it has been suggested that only logically complete systems, like first-order logic , qualify as logics.
For such reasons, some theorists deny that higher-order logics are logics in the strict sense.
Informal logic   Main article: Informal logic  When understood in a wide sense, logic encompasses both formal and informal logic.
Informal logic uses non-formal criteria and standards to analyze and assess the correctness of arguments.
Its main focus is on everyday discourse.
Its development was prompted by difficulties in applying the insights of formal logic to natural language arguments.
In this regard, it considers problems that formal logic on its own is unable to address.
Both provide criteria for assessing the correctness of arguments and distinguishing them from fallacies.
Many characterizations of informal logic have been suggested but there is no general agreement on its precise definition.
The most literal approach sees the terms "formal" and "informal" as applying to the language used to express arguments.
On this view, informal logic studies arguments that are in informal or natural language.
Formal logic can only examine them indirectly by translating them first into a formal language while informal logic investigates them in their original form.
On this view, the argument "Birds fly.
Tweety is a bird.
Therefore, Tweety flies."
belongs to natural language and is examined by informal logic.
But the formal translation "(1)     ∀  x  (  B  i  r  d  (  x  )  →  F  l  i  e  s  (  x  )  )    {\displaystyle \forall x(Bird(x)\to Flies(x))}   ; (2)     B  i  r  d  (  T  w  e  e  t  y  )    {\displaystyle Bird(Tweety)}   ; (3)     F  l  i  e  s  (  T  w  e  e  t  y  )    {\displaystyle Flies(Tweety)}   " is studied by formal logic.
The study of natural language arguments comes with various difficulties.
For example, natural language expressions are often ambiguous, vague, and context-dependent.
Another approach defines informal logic in a wide sense as the normative study of the standards, criteria, and procedures of argumentation.
In this sense, it includes questions about the role of rationality , critical thinking , and the psychology of argumentation.
Another characterization identifies informal logic with the study of non-deductive arguments.
In this way, it contrasts with deductive reasoning examined by formal logic.
Non-deductive arguments make their conclusion probable but do not ensure that it is true.
An example is the inductive argument from the empirical observation that "all ravens I have seen so far are black" to the conclusion "all ravens are black".
A further approach is to define informal logic as the study of informal fallacies .
Informal fallacies are incorrect arguments in which errors are present in the content and the context of the argument.
A false dilemma , for example, involves an error of content by excluding viable options.
This is the case in the fallacy "you are either with us or against us; you are not with us; therefore, you are against us".
Some theorists state that formal logic studies the general form of arguments while informal logic studies particular instances of arguments.
Another approach is to hold that formal logic only considers the role of logical constants for correct inferences while informal logic also takes the meaning of substantive concepts into account.
Further approaches focus on the discussion of logical topics with or without formal devices and on the role of epistemology for the assessment of arguments.
Basic concepts   Premises, conclusions, and truth   Premises and conclusions   Main articles: Premise and Logical consequence  Premises and conclusions are the basic parts of inferences or arguments and therefore play a central role in logic.
In the case of a valid inference or a correct argument, the conclusion follows from the premises, or in other words, the premises support the conclusion.
For instance, the premises "Mars is red" and "Mars is a planet" support the conclusion "Mars is a red planet".
For most types of logic, it is accepted that premises and conclusions have to be truth-bearers .
This means that they have a truth value : they are either true or false.
Contemporary philosophy generally sees them either as propositions or as sentences .
Propositions are the denotations of sentences and are usually seen as abstract objects .
For example, the English sentence "the tree is green" is different from the German sentence "der Baum ist grün" but both express the same proposition.
Propositional theories of premises and conclusions are often criticized because they rely on abstract objects.
For instance, philosophical naturalists usually reject the existence of abstract objects.
Other arguments concern the challenges involved in specifying the identity criteria of propositions.
These objections are avoided by seeing premises and conclusions not as propositions but as sentences, i.e.
as concrete linguistic objects like the symbols displayed on a page of a book.
But this approach comes with new problems of its own: sentences are often context-dependent and ambiguous, meaning an argument's validity would not only depend on its parts but also on its context and on how it is interpreted.
Another approach is to understand premises and conclusions in psychological terms as thoughts or judgments.
This position is known as psychologism .
It was discussed at length around the turn of the 20th century but it is not widely accepted today.
Internal structure   Premises and conclusions have an internal structure.
As propositions or sentences, they can be either simple or complex.
A complex proposition has other propositions as its constituents, which are linked to each other through propositional connectives like "and" or "if...then".
Simple propositions, on the other hand, do not have propositional parts.
But they can also be conceived as having an internal structure: they are made up of subpropositional parts, like singular terms and predicates .
For example, the simple proposition "Mars is red" can be formed by applying the predicate "red" to the singular term "Mars".
In contrast, the complex proposition "Mars is red and Venus is white" is made up of two simple propositions connected by the propositional connective "and".
Whether a proposition is true depends, at least in part, on its constituents.
For complex propositions formed using truth-functional propositional connectives, their truth only depends on the truth values of their parts.
But this relation is more complicated in the case of simple propositions and their subpropositional parts.
These subpropositional parts have meanings of their own, like referring to objects or classes of objects.
Whether the simple proposition they form is true depends on their relation to reality, i.e.
what the objects they refer to are like.
This topic is studied by theories of reference .
Logical truth   Main article: Logical truth  Some complex propositions are true independently of the substantive meanings of their parts.
In classical logic, for example, the complex proposition "either Mars is red or Mars is not red" is true independent of whether its parts, like the simple proposition "Mars is red", are true or false.
In such cases, the truth is called a logical truth: a proposition is logically true if its truth depends only on the logical vocabulary used in it.
This means that it is true under all interpretations of its non-logical terms.
In some modal logics , this means that the proposition is true in all possible worlds.
Some theorists define logic as the study of logical truths.
Truth tables   Truth tables can be used to show how logical connectives work or how the truth values of complex propositions depends on their parts.
They have a column for each input variable.
Each row corresponds to one possible combination of the truth values these variables can take; for truth tables presented in the English literature, the symbols "T" and "F" or "1" and "0" are commonly used as abbreviations for the truth values "true" and "false".
The first columns present all the possible truth-value combinations for the input variables.
Entries in the other columns present the truth values of the corresponding expressions as determined by the input values.
For example, the expression "     p  ∧  q    {\displaystyle p\land q}   " uses the logical connective     ∧    {\displaystyle \land }   ( and ).
It could be used to express a sentence like "yesterday was Sunday and the weather was good".
It is only true if both of its input variables,     p    {\displaystyle p}   ("yesterday was Sunday") and     q    {\displaystyle q}   ("the weather was good"), are true.
In all other cases, the expression as a whole is false.
Other important logical connectives are     ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   ( not ),     ∨    {\displaystyle \lor }   ( or ),     →    {\displaystyle \to }   ( if...then ), and     ↑    {\displaystyle \uparrow }   ( Sheffer stroke ).
Given the conditional proposition     p  →  q    {\displaystyle p\to q}   , one can form truth tables of its converse      q  →  p    {\displaystyle q\to p}   , its inverse  (     ¬  p  →  ¬  q    {\displaystyle \lnot p\to \lnot q}   ) , and its contrapositive  (     ¬  q  →  ¬  p    {\displaystyle \lnot q\to \lnot p}   ) .
Truth tables can also be defined for more complex expressions that use several propositional connectives.
Truth table of various expressions  p   q   p ∧ q   p ∨ q   p → q   ¬p → ¬q   p      ↑    {\displaystyle \uparrow }    q    T  T  T  T  T  T  F   T  F  F  T  F  T  T   F  T  F  T  T  F  T   F  F  F  F  T  T  T  Arguments and inferences   Main articles: Argument and inference  Logic is commonly defined in terms of arguments or inferences as the study of their correctness.
An inference is the process of reasoning from these premises to the conclusion.
But these terms are often used interchangeably in logic.
Arguments are correct or incorrect depending on whether their premises support their conclusion.
Premises and conclusions, on the other hand, are true or false depending on whether they are in accord with reality.
In formal logic, a sound argument is an argument that is both correct and has only true premises.
Sometimes a distinction is made between simple and complex arguments.
A complex argument is made up of a chain of simple arguments.
This means that the conclusion of one argument acts as a premise of later arguments.
For a complex argument to be successful, each link of the chain has to be successful.
Argument terminology used in logic  Arguments and inferences are either correct or incorrect.
If they are correct then their premises support their conclusion.
In the incorrect case, this support is missing.
It can take different forms corresponding to the different types of reasoning .
The strongest form of support corresponds to deductive reasoning .
But even arguments that are not deductively valid may still be good arguments because their premises offer non-deductive support to their conclusions.
For such cases, the term ampliative or inductive reasoning is used.
Deductive arguments are associated with formal logic in contrast to the relation between ampliative arguments and informal logic.
Deductive   A deductively valid argument is one whose premises guarantee the truth of its conclusion.
For instance, the argument "(1) all frogs are amphibians; (2) no cats are amphibians; (3) therefore no cats are frogs" is deductively valid.
For deductive validity, it does not matter whether the premises or the conclusion are actually true.
So the argument "(1) all frogs are mammals; (2) no cats are mammals; (3) therefore no cats are frogs" is also valid because the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises.
According to an influential view by Alfred Tarski , deductive arguments have three essential features: (1) they are formal, i.e.
they depend only on the form of the premises and the conclusion; (2) they are a priori, i.e.
no sense experience is needed to determine whether they obtain; (3) they are modal, i.e.
that they hold by logical necessity for the given propositions, independent of any other circumstances.
Because of the first feature, the focus on formality, deductive inference is usually identified with rules of inference.
Rules of inference specify the form of the premises and the conclusion: how they have to be structured for the inference to be valid.
Arguments that do not follow any rule of inference are deductively invalid.
The modus ponens is a prominent rule of inference.
It has the form " p ; if p , then q ; therefore q ".
Knowing that it has just rained (     p    {\displaystyle p}   ) and that after rain the streets are wet (     p  →  q    {\displaystyle p\to q}   ), one can use modus ponens to deduce that the streets are wet (     q    {\displaystyle q}   ).
The third feature can be expressed by stating that deductively valid inferences are truth-preserving: it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
Because of this feature, it is often asserted that deductive inferences are uninformative since the conclusion cannot arrive at new information not already present in the premises.
But this point is not always accepted since it would mean, for example, that most of mathematics is uninformative.
A different characterization distinguishes between surface and depth information.
The surface information of a sentence is the information it presents explicitly.
Depth information is the totality of the information contained in the sentence, both explicitly and implicitly.
According to this view, deductive inferences are uninformative on the depth level.
But they can be highly informative on the surface level by making implicit information explicit.
This happens, for example, in mathematical proofs.
Ampliative   Ampliative arguments are arguments whose conclusions contain additional information not found in their premises.
In this regard, they are more interesting since they contain information on the depth level and the thinker may learn something genuinely new.
But this feature comes with a certain cost: the premises support the conclusion in the sense that they make its truth more likely but they do not ensure its truth.
This means that the conclusion of an ampliative argument may be false even though all its premises are true.
This characteristic is closely related to non-monotonicity and defeasibility : it may be necessary to retract an earlier conclusion upon receiving new information or in the light of new inferences drawn.
Ampliative reasoning plays a central role for many arguments found in everyday discourse and the sciences.
Ampliative arguments are not automatically incorrect.
Instead, they just follow different standards of correctness.
The support they provide for their conclusion usually comes in degrees.
This means that strong ampliative arguments make their conclusion very likely while weak ones are less certain.
As a consequence, the line between correct and incorrect arguments is blurry in some cases, as when the premises offer weak but non-negligible support.
This contrasts with deductive arguments, which are either valid or invalid with nothing in-between.
The terminology used to categorize ampliative arguments is inconsistent.
Some authors, like James Hawthorne, use the term " induction " to cover all forms of non-deductive arguments.
But in a more narrow sense, induction is only one type of ampliative argument alongside abductive arguments .
Some philosophers, like Leo Groarke, also allow conductive arguments  as one more type.
In this narrow sense, induction is often defined as a form of statistical generalization.
In this case, the premises of an inductive argument are many individual observations that all show a certain pattern.
The conclusion then is a general law that this pattern always obtains.
In this sense, one may infer that "all elephants are gray" based on one's past observations of the color of elephants.
A closely related form of inductive inference has as its conclusion not a general law but one more specific instance, as when it is inferred that an elephant one has not seen yet is also gray.
Some theorists, like Igor Douven, stipulate that inductive inferences rest only on statistical considerations.
This way, they can be distinguished from abductive inference.
Abductive inference may or may not take statistical observations into consideration.
In either case, the premises offer support for the conclusion because the conclusion is the best explanation of why the premises are true.
In this sense, abduction is also called the inference to the best explanation .
For example, given the premise that there is a plate with breadcrumbs in the kitchen in the early morning, one may infer the conclusion that one's house-mate had a midnight snack and was too tired to clean the table.
This conclusion is justified because it is the best explanation of the current state of the kitchen.
For abduction, it is not sufficient that the conclusion explains the premises.
For example, the conclusion that a burglar broke into the house last night, got hungry on the job, and had a midnight snack, would also explain the state of the kitchen.
But this conclusion is not justified because it is not the best or most likely explanation.
Fallacies   Not all arguments live up to the standards of correct reasoning.
When they do not, they are usually referred to as fallacies .
Their central aspect is not that their conclusion is false but that there is some flaw with the reasoning leading to this conclusion.
So the argument "it is sunny today; therefore spiders have eight legs" is fallacious even though the conclusion is true.
Some theorists, like John Stuart Mill , give a more restrictive definition of fallacies by additionally requiring that they appear to be correct.
This way, genuine fallacies can be distinguished from mere mistakes of reasoning due to carelessness.
This explains why people tend to commit fallacies: because they have an alluring element that seduces people into committing and accepting them.
However, this reference to appearances is controversial because it belongs to the field of psychology , not logic, and because appearances may be different for different people.
Young America's dilemma: Shall I be wise and great, or rich and powerful?
(poster from 1901) This is an example of a false dilemma : an informal fallacy using a disjunctive premise that excludes viable alternatives.
Fallacies are usually divided into formal and informal fallacies.
For formal fallacies, the source of the error is found in the form of the argument.
For example, denying the antecedent is one type of formal fallacy, as in "if Othello is a bachelor, then he is male; Othello is not a bachelor; therefore Othello is not male".
But most fallacies fall into the category of informal fallacies, of which a great variety is discussed in the academic literature.
The source of their error is usually found in the content or the context of the argument.
Informal fallacies are sometimes categorized as fallacies of ambiguity, fallacies of presumption, or fallacies of relevance.
For fallacies of ambiguity, the ambiguity and vagueness of natural language are responsible for their flaw, as in "feathers are light; what is light cannot be dark; therefore feathers cannot be dark".
Fallacies of presumption have a wrong or unjustified premise but may be valid otherwise.
In the case of fallacies of relevance, the premises do not support the conclusion because they are not relevant to it.
Definitory and strategic rules   The main focus of most logicians is to study the criteria according to which an argument is correct or incorrect.
A fallacy is committed if these criteria are violated.
In the case of formal logic, they are known as rules of inference .
They are definitory rules, which determine whether an inference is correct or which inferences are allowed.
Definitory rules contrast with strategic rules.
Strategic rules specify which inferential moves are necessary to reach a given conclusion based on a set of premises.
This distinction does not just apply to logic but also to games.
In chess , for example, the definitory rules dictate that bishops may only move diagonally.
The strategic rules, on the other hand, describe how the allowed moves may be used to win a game, for instance, by controlling the center and by defending one's king .
It has been argued that logicians should give more emphasis to strategic rules since they are highly relevant for effective reasoning.
Formal systems   Main article: Formal system  A formal system of logic consists of a formal language together with a set of axioms and a proof system used to draw inferences from these axioms.
In logic, axioms are statements that are accepted without proof.
They are used to justify other statements.
Some theorists also include a semantics that specifies how the expressions of the formal language relate to real objects.
A formal language consists of an alphabet and syntactic rules.
The alphabet is the set of basic symbols used in expressions .
The syntactic rules determine how these symbols may be arranged to result in well-formed formulas.
For instance, the syntactic rules of propositional logic determine that "     P  ∧  Q    {\displaystyle P\land Q}   " is a well-formed formula but "     ∧  Q    {\displaystyle \land Q}   " is not since the logical conjunction     ∧    {\displaystyle \land }   requires terms on both sides.
A proof system is a collection of rules to construct formal proofs.
It is a tool to arrive at conclusions from a set of axioms.
Rules in a proof system are defined in terms of the syntactic form of formulas independent of their specific content.
For instance, the classical rule of conjunction introduction states that     P  ∧  Q    {\displaystyle P\land Q}   follows from the premises     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   .
Such rules can be applied sequentially, giving a mechanical procedure for generating conclusions from premises.
There are different types of proof systems including natural deduction and sequent calculi .
A semantics is a system for mapping expressions of a formal language to their denotations.
In many systems of logic, denotations are truth values.
For instance, the semantics for classical propositional logic assigns the formula     P  ∧  Q    {\displaystyle P\land Q}   the denotation "true" whenever     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   are true.
From the semantic point of view, a premise entails a conclusion if the conclusion is true whenever the premise is true.
A system of logic is sound when its proof system cannot derive a conclusion from a set of premises unless it is semantically entailed by them.
In other words, its proof system cannot lead to false conclusions, as defined by the semantics.
A system is complete when its proof system can derive every conclusion that is semantically entailed by its premises.
In other words, its proof system can lead to any true conclusion, as defined by the semantics.
Thus, soundness and completeness together describe a system whose notions of validity and entailment line up perfectly.
Systems of logic   Systems of logic are theoretical frameworks for assessing the correctness of reasoning and arguments.
For over two thousand years, Aristotelian logic was treated as the canon of logic in the Western world,  but modern developments in this field have led to a vast proliferation of logical systems.
One prominent categorization divides modern formal logical systems into classical logic , extended logics, and deviant logics .
Aristotelian   Main article: Aristotelian logic  Aristotelian logic encompasses a great variety of topics.
They include metaphysical theses about ontological categories and problems of scientific explanation.
But in a more narrow sense, it is identical to term logic or syllogistics.
A syllogism is a form of argument involving three propositions: two premises and a conclusion.
Each proposition has three essential parts: a subject , a predicate, and a copula connecting the subject to the predicate.
For example, the proposition "Socrates is wise" is made up of the subject "Socrates", the predicate "wise", and the copula "is".
The subject and the predicate are the terms of the proposition.
Aristotelian logic does not contain complex propositions made up of simple propositions.
It differs in this aspect from propositional logic, in which any two propositions can be linked using a logical connective like "and" to form a new complex proposition.
The square of opposition is often used to visualize the relations between the four basic categorical propositions in Aristotelian logic.
It shows, for example, that the propositions "All S are P" and "Some S are not P" are contradictory, meaning that one of them has to be true while the other is false.
In Aristotelian logic, the subject can be universal , particular , indefinite , or singular .
For example, the term "all humans" is a universal subject in the proposition "all humans are mortal".
A similar proposition could be formed by replacing it with the particular term "some humans", the indefinite term "a human", or the singular term "Socrates".
Aristotelian logic only includes predicates for simple properties of entities.
But it lacks predicates corresponding to relations between entities.
The predicate can be linked to the subject in two ways: either by affirming it or by denying it.
For example, the proposition "Socrates is not a cat" involves the denial of the predicate "cat" to the subject "Socrates".
Using combinations of subjects and predicates, a great variety of propositions and syllogisms can be formed.
Syllogisms are characterized by the fact that the premises are linked to each other and to the conclusion by sharing one predicate in each case.
Thus, these three propositions contain three predicates, referred to as major term , minor term , and middle term .
The central aspect of Aristotelian logic involves classifying all possible syllogisms into valid and invalid arguments according to how the propositions are formed.
For example, the syllogism "all men are mortal; Socrates is a man; therefore Socrates is mortal" is valid.
The syllogism "all cats are mortal; Socrates is mortal; therefore Socrates is a cat", on the other hand, is invalid.
Classical   Main article: Classical logic  Classical logic is distinct from traditional or Aristotelian logic.
It encompasses propositional logic and first-order logic.
It is "classical" in the sense that it is based on basic logical intuitions shared by most logicians.
These intuitions include the law of excluded middle , the double negation elimination , the principle of explosion , and the bivalence of truth.
It was originally developed to analyze mathematical arguments and was only later applied to other fields as well.
Because of this focus on mathematics, it does not include logical vocabulary relevant to many other topics of philosophical importance.
Examples of concepts it overlooks are the contrast between necessity and possibility and the problem of ethical obligation and permission.
Similarly, it does not address the relations between past, present, and future.
Such issues are addressed by extended logics.
They build on the basic intuitions of classical logic and expand it by introducing new logical vocabulary.
This way, the exact logical approach is applied to fields like ethics or epistemology that lie beyond the scope of mathematics.
Propositional logic   Main article: Propositional calculus  Propositional logic comprises formal systems in which formulae are built from atomic propositions using logical connectives .
For instance, propositional logic represents the conjunction of two atomic propositions     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   as the complex formula     P  ∧  Q    {\displaystyle P\land Q}   .
Unlike predicate logic where terms and predicates are the smallest units, propositional logic takes full propositions with truth values as its most basic component.
Thus, propositional logics can only represent logical relationships that arise from the way complex propositions are built from simpler ones.
But it cannot represent inferences that result from the inner structure of a proposition.
First-order logic   Gottlob Frege 's Begriffschrift introduced the notion of quantifier in a graphical notation, which here represents the judgment that     ∀  x  .
F  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \forall x.F(x)}   is true.
Main article: First-order logic  First-order logic includes the same propositional connectives as propositional logic but differs from it because it articulates the internal structure of propositions.
This happens through devices such as singular terms, which refer to particular objects, predicates , which refer to properties and relations, and quantifiers, which treat notions like "some" and "all".
For example, to express the proposition "this raven is black", one may use the predicate     B    {\displaystyle B}   for the property "black" and the singular term     r    {\displaystyle r}   referring to the raven to form the expression     B  (  r  )    {\displaystyle B(r)}   .
To express that some objects are black, the existential quantifier     ∃    {\displaystyle \exists }   is combined with the variable     x    {\displaystyle x}   to form the proposition     ∃  x  B  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \exists xB(x)}   .
First-order logic contains various rules of inference that determine how expressions articulated this way can form valid arguments, for example, that one may infer     ∃  x  B  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \exists xB(x)}   from     B  (  r  )    {\displaystyle B(r)}   .
Extended   Extended logics are logical systems that accept the basic principles of classical logic.
They introduce additional symbols and principles to apply it to fields like metaphysics , ethics , and epistemology .
Modal logic   Main article: Modal logic  Modal logic is an extension of classical logic.
In its original form, sometimes called "alethic modal logic", it introduces two new symbols:     ◊    {\displaystyle \Diamond }   expresses that something is possible while     ◻    {\displaystyle \Box }   expresses that something is necessary.
For example, if the formula     B  (  s  )    {\displaystyle B(s)}   stands for the sentence "Socrates is a banker" then the formula     ◊  B  (  s  )    {\displaystyle \Diamond B(s)}   articulates the sentence "It is possible that Socrates is a banker".
To include these symbols in the logical formalism, modal logic introduces new rules of inference that govern what role they play in inferences.
One rule of inference states that, if something is necessary, then it is also possible.
This means that     ◊  A    {\displaystyle \Diamond A}   follows from     ◻  A    {\displaystyle \Box A}   .
Another principle states that if a proposition is necessary then its negation is impossible and vice versa.
This means that     ◻  A    {\displaystyle \Box A}   is equivalent to     ¬  ◊  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \lnot \Diamond \lnot A}   .
Other forms of modal logic introduce similar symbols but associate different meanings with them to apply modal logic to other fields.
For example, deontic logic concerns the field of ethics and introduces symbols to express the ideas of obligation and permission , i.e.
to describe whether an agent has to perform a certain action or is allowed to perform it.
The modal operators in temporal modal logic articulate temporal relations.
They can be used to express, for example, that something happened at one time or that something is happening all the time.
In epistemology, epistemic modal logic is used to represent the ideas of knowing something in contrast to merely believing it to be the case.
Higher order logic   Main article: Higher-order logic  Higher-order logics extend classical logic not by using modal operators but by introducing new forms of quantification.
Quantifiers correspond to terms like "all" or "some".
In classical first-order logic, quantifiers are only applied to individuals.
The formula "     ∃  x  (  A  p  p  l  e  (  x  )  ∧  S  w  e  e  t  (  x  )  )    {\displaystyle \exists x(Apple(x)\land Sweet(x))}   " ( some apples are sweet) is an example of the existential quantifier  "     ∃    {\displaystyle \exists }   " applied to the individual variable "     x    {\displaystyle x}   " .
In higher-order logics, quantification is also allowed over predicates.
This increases its expressive power.
For example, to express the idea that Mary and John share some qualities, one could use the formula "     ∃  Q  (  Q  (  M  a  r  y  )  ∧  Q  (  J  o  h  n  )  )    {\displaystyle \exists Q(Q(Mary)\land Q(John))}   " .
In this case, the existential quantifier is applied to the predicate variable "     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   " .
The added expressive power is especially useful for mathematics since it allows for more succinct formulations of mathematical theories.
But it has drawbacks in regard to its meta-logical properties and ontological implications, which is why first-order logic is still more commonly used.
Deviant   Main article: Deviant logic  Deviant logics are logical systems that reject some of the basic intuitions of classical logic.
Because of this, they are usually seen not as its supplements but as its rivals.
Deviant logical systems differ from each other either because they reject different classical intuitions or because they propose different alternatives to the same issue.
Intuitionistic logic is a restricted version of classical logic.
It uses the same symbols but excludes some rules of inference.
For example, according to the law of double negation elimination, if a sentence is not not true, then it is true.
This means that     A    {\displaystyle A}   follows from     ¬  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \lnot \lnot A}   .
This is a valid rule of inference in classical logic but it is invalid in intuitionistic logic.
Another classical principle not part of intuitionistic logic is the law of excluded middle .
It states that for every sentence, either it or its negation is true.
This means that every proposition of the form     A  ∨  ¬  A    {\displaystyle A\lor \lnot A}   is true.
These deviations from classical logic are based on the idea that truth is established by verification using a proof.
Intuitionistic logic is especially prominent in the field of constructive mathematics , which emphasizes the need to find or construct a specific example to prove its existence.
Multi-valued logics depart from classicality by rejecting the principle of bivalence , which requires all propositions to be either true or false.
For instance, Jan Łukasiewicz and Stephen Cole Kleene both proposed ternary logics which have a third truth value representing that a statement's truth value is indeterminate.
These logics have been applied in the field of linguistics.
Fuzzy logics are multivalued logics that have an infinite number of "degrees of truth", represented by a real number between 0 and 1.
Paraconsistent logics are logical systems that can deal with contradictions.
They are formulated to avoid the principle of explosion: for them, it is not the case that anything follows from a contradiction.
They are often motivated by dialetheism , the view that contradictions are real or that reality itself is contradictory.
Graham Priest is an influential contemporary proponent of this position and similar views have been ascribed to Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel .
Informal   Main article: Informal logic  Informal logic is usually carried out in a less systematic way.
It often focuses on more specific issues, like investigating a particular type of fallacy or studying a certain aspect of argumentation.
Nonetheless, some frameworks of informal logic have also been presented that try to provide a systematic characterization of the correctness of arguments.
The pragmatic or dialogical approach to informal logic sees arguments as speech acts and not merely as a set of premises together with a conclusion.
As speech acts, they occur in a certain context, like a dialogue , which affects the standards of right and wrong arguments.
A prominent version by Douglas N.
Walton understands a dialogue as a game between two players.
The initial position of each player is characterized by the propositions to which they are committed and the conclusion they intend to prove.
Dialogues are games of persuasion: each player has the goal of convincing the opponent of their own conclusion.
This is achieved by making arguments: arguments are the moves of the game.
They affect to which propositions the players are committed.
A winning move is a successful argument that takes the opponent's commitments as premises and shows how one's own conclusion follows from them.
This is usually not possible straight away.
For this reason, it is normally necessary to formulate a sequence of arguments as intermediary steps, each of which brings the opponent a little closer to one's intended conclusion.
Besides these positive arguments leading one closer to victory, there are also negative arguments preventing the opponent's victory by denying their conclusion.
Whether an argument is correct depends on whether it promotes the progress of the dialogue.
Fallacies, on the other hand, are violations of the standards of proper argumentative rules.
These standards also depend on the type of dialogue.
For example, the standards governing the scientific discourse differ from the standards in business negotiations.
The epistemic approach to informal logic, on the other hand, focuses on the epistemic role of arguments.
It is based on the idea that arguments aim to increase our knowledge.
They achieve this by linking justified beliefs to beliefs that are not yet justified.
Correct arguments succeed at expanding knowledge while fallacies are epistemic failures: they do not justify the belief in their conclusion.
For example, the fallacy of begging the question is a fallacy because it fails to provide independent justification for its conclusion, even though it is deductively valid.
In this sense, logical normativity consists in epistemic success or rationality.
The Bayesian approach is one example of an epistemic approach.
Central to Bayesianism is not just whether the agent believes something but the degree to which they believe it, the so-called credence .
Degrees of belief are seen as subjective probabilities in the believed proposition, i.e.
how certain the agent is that the proposition is true.
On this view, reasoning can be interpreted as a process of changing one's credences, often in reaction to new incoming information.
Correct reasoning and the arguments it is based on follow the laws of probability, for example, the principle of conditionalization .
Bad or irrational reasoning, on the other hand, violates these laws.
Areas of research   Logic is studied in various fields.
In many cases, this is done by applying its formal method to specific topics outside its scope, like to ethics or computer science.
In other cases, logic itself is made the subject of research in another discipline.
This can happen in diverse ways.
For instance, it can involve investigating the philosophical assumptions linked to the basic concepts used by logicians.
Other ways include interpreting and analyzing logic through mathematical structures as well as studying and comparing abstract properties of formal logical systems.
Philosophy of logic and philosophical logic   Main articles: Philosophy of logic and Philosophical logic  Philosophy of logic is the philosophical discipline studying the scope and nature of logic.
It examines many presuppositions implicit in logic, like how to define its basic concepts or the metaphysical assumptions associated with them.
It is also concerned with how to classify logical systems and considers the ontological commitments they incur.
Philosophical logic is one of the areas within the philosophy of logic.
It studies the application of logical methods to philosophical problems in fields like metaphysics, ethics, and epistemology.
This application usually happens in the form of extended or deviant logical systems .
Metalogic   Main article: Metalogic  Metalogic is the field of inquiry studying the properties of formal logical systems.
For example, when a new formal system is developed, metalogicians may study it to determine which formulas can be proven in it.
They may also study whether an algorithm could be developed to find a proof for each formula and whether every provable formula in it is a tautology.
Finally, they may compare it to other logical systems to understand its distinctive features.
A key issue in metalogic concerns the relation between syntax and semantics.
The syntactic rules of a formal system determine how to deduce conclusions from premises, i.e.
how to formulate proofs.
The semantics of a formal system governs which sentences are true and which ones are false.
This determines the validity of arguments since, for valid arguments, it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
The relation between syntax and semantics concerns issues like whether every valid argument is provable and whether every provable argument is valid.
Metalogicians also study whether logical systems are complete, sound, and consistent .
They are interested in whether the systems are decidable and what expressive power they have.
Metalogicians usually rely heavily on abstract mathematical reasoning when examining and formulating metalogical proofs.
This way, they aim to arrive at precise and general conclusions on these topics.
Mathematical logic   Main article: Mathematical logic  Bertrand Russell made various contributions to mathematical logic.
The term "mathematical logic" is sometimes used as a synonym of "formal logic".
But in a more restricted sense, it refers to the study of logic within mathematics.
Major subareas include model theory , proof theory , set theory , and computability theory .
Research in mathematical logic commonly addresses the mathematical properties of formal systems of logic.
However, it can also include attempts to use logic to analyze mathematical reasoning or to establish logic-based foundations of mathematics .
The latter was a major concern in early 20th-century mathematical logic, which pursued the program of logicism pioneered by philosopher-logicians such as Gottlob Frege, Alfred North Whitehead , and Bertrand Russell .
Mathematical theories were supposed to be logical tautologies , and their program was to show this by means of a reduction of mathematics to logic.
Many attempts to realize this program failed, from the crippling of Frege's project in his Grundgesetze by Russell's paradox , to the defeat of Hilbert's program by Gödel's incompleteness theorems .
Set theory originated in the study of the infinite by Georg Cantor , and it has been the source of many of the most challenging and important issues in mathematical logic.
They include Cantor's theorem , the status of the Axiom of Choice , the question of the independence of the continuum hypothesis , and the modern debate on large cardinal axioms.
Computability theory is the branch of mathematical logic that studies effective procedures to solve calculation problems.
One of its main goals is to understand whether it is possible to solve a given problem using an algorithm.
For instance, given a certain claim about the positive integers, it examines whether an algorithm can be found to determine if this claim is true.
Computability theory uses various theoretical tools and models, such as Turing machines , to explore this type of issue.
Computational logic   Main articles: Computational logic and Logic in computer science  Conjunction (AND) is one of the basic operations of Boolean logic.
It can be electronically implemented in several ways, for example, by using two transistors .
Computational logic is the branch of logic and computer science that studies how to implement mathematical reasoning and logical formalisms using computers.
This includes, for example, automatic theorem provers , which employ rules of inference to construct a proof step by step from a set of premises to the intended conclusion without human intervention.
Logic programming languages are designed specifically to express facts using logical formulas and to draw inferences from these facts.
For example, Prolog is a logic programming language based on predicate logic.
Computer scientists also apply concepts from logic to problems in computing.
The works of Claude Shannon were influential in this regard.
He showed how Boolean logic can be used to understand and implement computer circuits.
This can be achieved using electronic logic gates , i.e.
electronic circuits with one or more inputs and usually one output.
The truth values of propositions are represented by voltage levels.
This way, logic functions can be simulated by applying the corresponding voltages to the inputs of the circuit and determining the value of the function by measuring the voltage of the output.
Formal semantics of natural language   Main article: Formal semantics (natural language)  Formal semantics is a subfield of logic, linguistics , and the philosophy of language .
The discipline of semantics studies the meaning of language.
Formal semantics uses formal tools from the fields of symbolic logic and mathematics to give precise theories of the meaning of natural language expressions.
It understands meaning usually in relation to truth conditions , i.e.
it examines in which situations a sentence would be true or false.
One of its central methodological assumptions is the principle of compositionality .
It states that the meaning of a complex expression is determined by the meanings of its parts and how they are combined.
For example, the meaning of the verb phrase "walk and sing" depends on the meanings of the individual expressions "walk" and "sing".
Many theories in formal semantics rely on model theory.
This means that they employ set theory to construct a model and then interpret the meanings of expression in relation to the elements in this model.
For example, the term "walk" may be interpreted as the set of all individuals in the model that share the property of walking.
Early influential theorists in this field were Richard Montague and Barbara Partee , who focused their analysis on the English language.
Epistemology of logic   The epistemology of logic studies how one knows that an argument is valid or that a proposition is logically true.
This includes questions like how to justify that modus ponens is a valid rule of inference or that contradictions are false.
The traditionally dominant view is that this form of logical understanding belongs to knowledge a priori .
In this regard, it is often argued that the mind has a special faculty to examine relations between pure ideas and that this faculty is also responsible for apprehending logical truths.
A similar approach understands the rules of logic in terms of linguistic conventions .
On this view, the laws of logic are trivial since they are true by definition: they just express the meanings of the logical vocabulary.
Some theorists, like Hilary Putnam and Penelope Maddy , object to the view that logic is knowable a priori.
They hold instead that logical truths depend on the empirical world.
This is usually combined with the claim that the laws of logic express universal regularities found in the structural features of the world.
According to this view, they may be explored by studying general patterns of the fundamental sciences .
For example, it has been argued that certain insights of quantum mechanics refute the principle of distributivity in classical logic, which states that the formula     A  ∧  (  B  ∨  C  )    {\displaystyle A\land (B\lor C)}   is equivalent to     (  A  ∧  B  )  ∨  (  A  ∧  C  )    {\displaystyle (A\land B)\lor (A\land C)}   .
This claim can be used as an empirical argument for the thesis that quantum logic is the correct logical system and should replace classical logic.
History   Main article: History of logic  Top row: Aristotle , who established the canon of western philosophy;  and Avicenna , who replaced Aristotelian logic in Islamic discourse .
Bottom row: William of Ockham , a major figure of medieval scholarly thought;  and Gottlob Frege , one of the founders of modern symbolic logic.
Logic was developed independently in several cultures during antiquity.
One major early contributor was Aristotle , who developed term logic in his Organon and Prior Analytics .
He was responsible for the introduction of the hypothetical syllogism  and temporal modal logic.
Further innovations include inductive logic  as well as the discussion of new logical concepts such as terms , predicables , syllogisms, and propositions.
Aristotelian logic was highly regarded in classical and medieval times, both in Europe and the Middle East.
It remained in wide use in the West until the early 19th century.
It has now been superseded by later work, though many of its key insights are still present in modern systems of logic.
Ibn Sina (Avicenna) was the founder of Avicennian logic, which replaced Aristotelian logic as the dominant system of logic in the Islamic world .
It influenced Western medieval writers such as Albertus Magnus and William of Ockham .
Ibn Sina wrote on the hypothetical syllogism  and on the propositional calculus .
He developed an original "temporally modalized" syllogistic theory, involving temporal logic and modal logic.
He also made use of inductive logic, such as his methods of agreement, difference, and concomitant variation, which are critical to the scientific method .
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi was another influential Muslim logician.
He criticized Aristotelian syllogistics and formulated an early system of inductive logic, foreshadowing the system of inductive logic developed by John Stuart Mill.
During the Middle Ages , many translations and interpretations of Aristotelian logic were made.
Of particular influence were the works of Boethius .
Besides translating Aristotle's work into Latin, he also produced textbooks on logic.
Later, the works of Islamic philosophers such as Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd (Averroes) were drawn on.
This expanded the range of ancient works available to medieval Christian scholars since more Greek work was available to Muslim scholars that had been preserved in Latin commentaries.
In 1323, William of Ockham's influential Summa Logicae was released.
It is a comprehensive treatise on logic that discusses many basic concepts of logic and provides a systematic exposition of types of propositions and their truth conditions.
In Chinese philosophy, the School of Names and Mohism were particularly influential.
The School of Names focused on the use of language and on paradoxes.
For example, Gongsun Long proposed the white horse paradox , which defends the thesis that a white horse is not a horse.
The school of Mohism also acknowledged the importance of language for logic and tried to relate the ideas in these fields to the realm of ethics.
In India, the study of logic was primarily pursued by the schools of Nyaya , Buddhism , and Jainism .
It was not treated as a separate academic discipline and discussions of its topics usually happened in the context of epistemology and theories of dialogue or argumentation.
In Nyaya, inference is understood as a source of knowledge ( pramāṇa ).
It follows the perception of an object and tries to arrive at conclusions, for example, about the cause of this object.
A similar emphasis on the relation to epistemology is also found in Buddhist and Jainist schools of logic, where inference is used to expand the knowledge gained through other sources.
Some of the later theories of Nyaya, belonging to the Navya-Nyāya school, resemble modern forms of logic, such as Gottlob Frege's distinction between sense and reference and his definition of number.
The syllogistic logic developed by Aristotle predominated in the West until the mid-19th century, when interest in the foundations of mathematics stimulated the development of modern symbolic logic.
Many see Gottlob Frege's Begriffsschrift as the birthplace of modern logic.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz 's idea of a universal formal language is often considered a forerunner.
Other pioneers were George Boole , who invented Boolean algebra as a mathematical system of logic, and Charles Peirce , who developed the logic of relatives .
Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, in turn, condensed many of these insights in their work Principia Mathematica .
Modern logic introduced novel concepts, such as functions , quantifiers, and relational predicates.
A hallmark of modern symbolic logic is its use of formal language to precisely codify its insights.
In this regard, it departs from earlier logicians, who relied mainly on natural language.
Of particular influence was the development of first-order logic, which is usually treated as the standard system of modern logic.
Its analytical generality allowed the formalization of mathematics and drove the investigation of set theory .
It also made Alfred Tarski's approach to model theory possible and provided the foundation of modern mathematical logic.
In mathematics, a statement that has been proved  Not to be confused with Teorema , Theorema , or Theory .
The Pythagorean theorem has at least 370 known proofs.
In mathematics , a theorem is a statement that has been proved , or can be proved.
The proof of a theorem is a logical argument that uses the inference rules of a deductive system to establish that the theorem is a logical consequence of the axioms and previously proved theorems.
In mainstream mathematics, the axioms and the inference rules are commonly left implicit, and, in this case, they are almost always those of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC), or of a less powerful theory, such as Peano arithmetic .
Generally, an assertion that is explicitly called a theorem is a proved result that is not an immediate consequence of other known theorems.
Moreover, many authors qualify as theorems only the most important results, and use the terms lemma , proposition and corollary for less important theorems.
In mathematical logic , the concepts of theorems and proofs have been formalized in order to allow mathematical reasoning about them.
In this context, statements become well-formed formulas of some formal language .
A theory consists of some basis statements called axioms , and some deducing rules (sometimes included in the axioms).
The theorems of the theory are the statements that can be derived from the axioms by using the deducing rules.
This formalization led to proof theory , which allows proving general theorems about theorems and proofs.
In particular, Gödel's incompleteness theorems show that every consistent theory containing the natural numbers has true statements on natural numbers that are not theorems of the theory (that is they cannot be proved inside the theory).
As the axioms are often abstractions of properties of the physical world , theorems may be considered as expressing some truth, but in contrast to the notion of a scientific law , which is experimental , the justification of the truth of a theorem is purely deductive .
Theoremhood and truth   Until the end of the 19th century and the foundational crisis of mathematics , all mathematical theories were built from a few basic properties that were considered as self-evident; for example, the facts that every natural number has a successor, and that there is exactly one line that passes through two given distinct points.
These basic properties that were considered as absolutely evident were called postulates or axioms ; for example Euclid's postulates .
All theorems were proved by using implicitly or explicitly these basic properties, and, because of the evidence of these basic properties, a proved theorem was considered as a definitive truth, unless there was an error in the proof.
For example, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle equals 180°, and this was considered as an undoubtable fact.
One aspect of the foundational crisis of mathematics was the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries that do not lead to any contradiction, although, in such geometries, the sum of the angles of a triangle is different from 180°.
So, the property "the sum of the angles of a triangle equals 180°" is either true or false, depending whether Euclid's fifth postulate is assumed or denied.
Similarly, the use of "evident" basic properties of sets leads to the contradiction of Russell's paradox .
This has been resolved by elaborating the rules that are allowed for manipulating sets.
This crisis has been resolved by revisiting the foundations of mathematics to make them more rigorous .
In these new foundations, a theorem is a well-formed formula of a mathematical theory that can be proved from the axioms and inference rules of the theory.
So, the above theorem on the sum of the angles of a triangle becomes: Under the axioms and inference rules of Euclidean geometry , the sum of the interior angles of a triangle equals 180° .
Similarly, Russell's paradox disappears because, in an axiomatized set theory, the set of all sets cannot be expressed with a well-formed formula.
More precisely, if the set of all sets can be expressed with a well-formed formula, this implies that the theory is inconsistent , and every well-formed assertion, as well as its negation, is a theorem.
In this context, the validity of a theorem depends only on the correctness of its proof.
It is independent from the truth, or even the significance of the axioms.
This does not mean that the significance of the axioms is uninteresting, but only that the validity of a theorem is independent from the significance of the axioms.
This independence may be useful by allowing the use of results of some area of mathematics in apparently unrelated areas.
An important consequence of this way of thinking about mathematics is that it allows defining mathematical theories and theorems as mathematical objects , and to prove theorems about them.
Examples are Gödel's incompleteness theorems .
In particular, there are well-formed assertions than can be proved to not be a theorem of the ambient theory, although they can be proved in a wider theory.
An example is Goodstein's theorem , which can be stated in Peano arithmetic , but is proved to be not provable in Peano arithmetic.
However, it is provable in some more general theories, such as Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory .
Epistemological considerations   Many mathematical theorems are conditional statements, whose proofs deduce conclusions from conditions known as hypotheses or premises .
In light of the interpretation of proof as justification of truth, the conclusion is often viewed as a necessary consequence of the hypotheses.
Namely, that the conclusion is true in case the hypotheses are true—without any further assumptions.
However, the conditional could also be interpreted differently in certain deductive systems , depending on the meanings assigned to the derivation rules and the conditional symbol (e.g., non-classical logic ).
Although theorems can be written in a completely symbolic form (e.g., as propositions in propositional calculus ), they are often expressed informally in a natural language such as English for better readability.
The same is true of proofs, which are often expressed as logically organized and clearly worded informal arguments, intended to convince readers of the truth of the statement of the theorem beyond any doubt, and from which a formal symbolic proof can in principle be constructed.
In addition to the better readability, informal arguments are typically easier to check than purely symbolic ones—indeed, many mathematicians would express a preference for a proof that not only demonstrates the validity of a theorem, but also explains in some way why it is obviously true.
In some cases, one might even be able to substantiate a theorem by using a picture as its proof.
Because theorems lie at the core of mathematics, they are also central to its aesthetics .
Theorems are often described as being "trivial", or "difficult", or "deep", or even "beautiful".
These subjective judgments vary not only from person to person, but also with time and culture: for example, as a proof is obtained, simplified or better understood, a theorem that was once difficult may become trivial.
On the other hand, a deep theorem may be stated simply, but its proof may involve surprising and subtle connections between disparate areas of mathematics.
Fermat's Last Theorem is a particularly well-known example of such a theorem.
Informal account of theorems   Logically , many theorems are of the form of an indicative conditional : If A, then B .
Such a theorem does not assert B — only that B is a necessary consequence of A .
In this case, A is called the hypothesis of the theorem ("hypothesis" here means something very different from a conjecture ), and B the conclusion of the theorem.
The two together (without the proof) are called the proposition or statement of the theorem (e.g. "
If A, then B " is the proposition ).
Alternatively, A and B can be also termed the antecedent and the consequent , respectively.
The theorem "If n is an even natural number , then n /2 is a natural number" is a typical example in which the hypothesis is " n is an even natural number", and the conclusion is " n /2 is also a natural number".
In order for a theorem to be proved, it must be in principle expressible as a precise, formal statement.
However, theorems are usually expressed in natural language rather than in a completely symbolic form—with the presumption that a formal statement can be derived from the informal one.
It is common in mathematics to choose a number of hypotheses within a given language and declare that the theory consists of all statements provable from these hypotheses.
These hypotheses form the foundational basis of the theory and are called axioms or postulates.
The field of mathematics known as proof theory studies formal languages, axioms and the structure of proofs.
A planar map with five colors such that no two regions with the same color meet.
It can actually be colored in this way with only four colors.
The four color theorem states that such colorings are possible for any planar map, but every known proof involves a computational search that is too long to check by hand.
Some theorems are " trivial ", in the sense that they follow from definitions, axioms, and other theorems in obvious ways and do not contain any surprising insights.
Some, on the other hand, may be called "deep", because their proofs may be long and difficult, involve areas of mathematics superficially distinct from the statement of the theorem itself, or show surprising connections between disparate areas of mathematics.
A theorem might be simple to state and yet be deep.
An excellent example is Fermat's Last Theorem ,  and there are many other examples of simple yet deep theorems in number theory and combinatorics , among other areas.
Other theorems have a known proof that cannot easily be written down.
The most prominent examples are the four color theorem and the Kepler conjecture .
Both of these theorems are only known to be true by reducing them to a computational search that is then verified by a computer program.
Initially, many mathematicians did not accept this form of proof, but it has become more widely accepted.
The mathematician Doron Zeilberger has even gone so far as to claim that these are possibly the only nontrivial results that mathematicians have ever proved.
Many mathematical theorems can be reduced to more straightforward computation, including polynomial identities, trigonometric identities  and hypergeometric identities.
Relation with scientific theories   This section does not cite any sources .
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources .
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .
( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Theorems in mathematics and theories in science are fundamentally different in their epistemology .
A scientific theory cannot be proved; its key attribute is that it is falsifiable , that is, it makes predictions about the natural world that are testable by experiments .
Any disagreement between prediction and experiment demonstrates the incorrectness of the scientific theory, or at least limits its accuracy or domain of validity.
Mathematical theorems, on the other hand, are purely abstract formal statements: the proof of a theorem cannot involve experiments or other empirical evidence in the same way such evidence is used to support scientific theories.
The Collatz conjecture : one way to illustrate its complexity is to extend the iteration from the natural numbers to the complex numbers.
The result is a fractal , which (in accordance with universality ) resembles the Mandelbrot set .
Nonetheless, there is some degree of empiricism and data collection involved in the discovery of mathematical theorems.
By establishing a pattern, sometimes with the use of a powerful computer, mathematicians may have an idea of what to prove, and in some cases even a plan for how to set about doing the proof.
It is also possible to find a single counter-example and so establish the impossibility of a proof for the proposition as-stated, and possibly suggest restricted forms of the original proposition that might have feasible proofs.
For example, both the Collatz conjecture and the Riemann hypothesis are well-known unsolved problems; they have been extensively studied through empirical checks, but remain unproven.
The Collatz conjecture has been verified for start values up to about 2.88 × 10 18 .
The Riemann hypothesis has been verified to hold for the first 10 trillion non-trivial zeroes of the zeta function .
Although most mathematicians can tolerate supposing that the conjecture and the hypothesis are true, neither of these propositions is considered proved.
Such evidence does not constitute proof.
For example, the Mertens conjecture is a statement about natural numbers that is now known to be false, but no explicit counterexample (i.e., a natural number n for which the Mertens function M ( n ) equals or exceeds the square root of n ) is known: all numbers less than 10 14 have the Mertens property, and the smallest number that does not have this property is only known to be less than the exponential of 1.59 × 10 40 , which is approximately 10 to the power 4.3 × 10 39 .
Since the number of particles in the universe is generally considered less than 10 to the power 100 (a googol ), there is no hope to find an explicit counterexample by exhaustive search .
The word "theory" also exists in mathematics, to denote a body of mathematical axioms, definitions and theorems, as in, for example, group theory (see mathematical theory ).
There are also "theorems" in science, particularly physics, and in engineering, but they often have statements and proofs in which physical assumptions and intuition play an important role; the physical axioms on which such "theorems" are based are themselves falsifiable.
Terminology   A number of different terms for mathematical statements exist; these terms indicate the role statements play in a particular subject.
The distinction between different terms is sometimes rather arbitrary, and the usage of some terms has evolved over time.
An axiom or postulate is a fundamental assumption regarding the object of study, that is accepted without proof.
A related concept is that of a definition , which gives the meaning of a word or a phrase in terms of known concepts.
Classical geometry discerns between axioms, which are general statements; and postulates, which are statements about geometrical objects.
Historically, axioms were regarded as " self-evident "; today they are merely assumed to be true.
A conjecture is an unproved statement that is believed to be true.
Conjectures are usually made in public, and named after their maker (for example, Goldbach's conjecture and Collatz conjecture ).
The term hypothesis is also used in this sense (for example, Riemann hypothesis ), which should not be confused with "hypothesis" as the premise of a proof.
Other terms are also used on occasion, for example problem when people are not sure whether the statement should be believed to be true.
Fermat's Last Theorem was historically called a theorem, although, for centuries, it was only a conjecture.
A theorem is a statement that has been proven to be true based on axioms and other theorems.
A proposition is a theorem of lesser importance, or one that is considered so elementary or immediately obvious, that it may be stated without proof.
This should not be confused with "proposition" as used in propositional logic .
In classical geometry the term "proposition" was used differently: in Euclid 's Elements ( c.
300 BCE ), all theorems and geometric constructions were called "propositions" regardless of their importance.
A lemma is an "accessory proposition" - a proposition with little applicability outside its use in a particular proof.
Over time a lemma may gain in importance and be considered a theorem , though the term "lemma" is usually kept as part of its name (e.g.
Gauss's lemma , Zorn's lemma , and the fundamental lemma ).
A corollary is a proposition that follows immediately from another theorem or axiom, with little or no required proof.
A corollary may also be a restatement of a theorem in a simpler form, or for a special case : for example, the theorem "all internal angles in a rectangle are right angles " has a corollary that "all internal angles in a square are right angles " - a square being a special case of a rectangle.
A generalization of a theorem is a theorem with a similar statement but a broader scope, from which the original theorem can be deduced as a special case (a corollary ).
Other terms may also be used for historical or customary reasons, for example:  An identity is a theorem stating an equality between two expressions, that holds for any value within its domain (e.g.
Bézout's identity and Vandermonde's identity ).
A rule is a theorem that establishes a useful formula (e.g.
Bayes' rule and Cramer's rule ).
A law or principle is a theorem with wide applicability (e.g.
the law of large numbers , law of cosines , Kolmogorov's zero–one law , Harnack's principle , the least-upper-bound principle , and the pigeonhole principle ).
A few well-known theorems have even more idiosyncratic names, for example, the division algorithm , Euler's formula , and the Banach–Tarski paradox .
Layout   A theorem and its proof are typically laid out as follows:  Theorem (name of the person who proved it, along with year of discovery or publication of the proof)  Statement of theorem (sometimes called the proposition )  Proof  Description of proof  End  The end of the proof may be signaled by the letters Q.E.D.
( quod erat demonstrandum ) or by one of the tombstone marks, such as "□" or "∎", meaning "end of proof", introduced by Paul Halmos following their use in magazines to mark the end of an article.
The exact style depends on the author or publication.
Many publications provide instructions or macros for typesetting in the house style .
It is common for a theorem to be preceded by definitions describing the exact meaning of the terms used in the theorem.
It is also common for a theorem to be preceded by a number of propositions or lemmas which are then used in the proof.
However, lemmas are sometimes embedded in the proof of a theorem, either with nested proofs, or with their proofs presented after the proof of the theorem.
Corollaries to a theorem are either presented between the theorem and the proof, or directly after the proof.
Sometimes, corollaries have proofs of their own that explain why they follow from the theorem.
Lore   It has been estimated that over a quarter of a million theorems are proved every year.
The well-known aphorism , "A mathematician is a device for turning coffee into theorems" , is probably due to Alfréd Rényi , although it is often attributed to Rényi's colleague Paul Erdős (and Rényi may have been thinking of Erdős), who was famous for the many theorems he produced, the number of his collaborations, and his coffee drinking.
The classification of finite simple groups is regarded by some to be the longest proof of a theorem.
It comprises tens of thousands of pages in 500 journal articles by some 100 authors.
These papers are together believed to give a complete proof, and several ongoing projects hope to shorten and simplify this proof.
Another theorem of this type is the four color theorem whose computer generated proof is too long for a human to read.
It is among the longest known proofs of a theorem whose statement can be easily understood by a layman.
Theorems in logic   In mathematical logic , a formal theory is a set of sentences within a formal language .
A sentence is a well-formed formula with no free variables.
A sentence that is a member of a theory is one of its theorems, and the theory is the set of its theorems.
Usually a theory is understood to be closed under the relation of logical consequence .
Some accounts define a theory to be closed under the semantic consequence relation (     ⊨    {\displaystyle \models }   ), while others define it to be closed under the syntactic consequence , or derivability relation (     ⊢    {\displaystyle \vdash }   ).
This diagram shows the syntactic entities that can be constructed from formal languages .
The symbols and strings of symbols may be broadly divided into nonsense and well-formed formulas .
A formal language can be thought of as identical to the set of its well-formed formulas.
The set of well-formed formulas may be broadly divided into theorems and non-theorems.
For a theory to be closed under a derivability relation, it must be associated with a deductive system that specifies how the theorems are derived.
The deductive system may be stated explicitly, or it may be clear from the context.
The closure of the empty set under the relation of logical consequence yields the set that contains just those sentences that are the theorems of the deductive system.
In the broad sense in which the term is used within logic, a theorem does not have to be true, since the theory that contains it may be unsound relative to a given semantics, or relative to the standard interpretation of the underlying language.
A theory that is inconsistent has all sentences as theorems.
The definition of theorems as sentences of a formal language is useful within proof theory , which is a branch of mathematics that studies the structure of formal proofs and the structure of provable formulas.
It is also important in model theory , which is concerned with the relationship between formal theories and structures that are able to provide a semantics for them through interpretation .
Although theorems may be uninterpreted sentences, in practice mathematicians are more interested in the meanings of the sentences, i.e.
in the propositions they express.
What makes formal theorems useful and interesting is that they may be interpreted as true propositions and their derivations may be interpreted as a proof of their truth.
A theorem whose interpretation is a true statement about a formal system (as opposed to within a formal system) is called a metatheorem .
Some important theorems in mathematical logic are:  Compactness of first-order logic  Completeness of first-order logic  Gödel's incompleteness theorems of first-order arithmetic  Consistency of first-order arithmetic  Tarski's undefinability theorem  Church-Turing theorem of undecidability  Löb's theorem  Löwenheim–Skolem theorem  Lindström's theorem  Craig's theorem  Cut-elimination theorem  Syntax and semantics   Main articles: Syntax (logic) and Formal semantics (logic)  The concept of a formal theorem is fundamentally syntactic, in contrast to the notion of a true proposition, which introduces semantics .
Different deductive systems can yield other interpretations, depending on the presumptions of the derivation rules (i.e.
belief , justification or other modalities ).
The soundness of a formal system depends on whether or not all of its theorems are also validities .
A validity is a formula that is true under any possible interpretation (for example, in classical propositional logic, validities are tautologies ).
A formal system is considered semantically complete when all of its theorems are also tautologies.
Interpretation of a formal theorem   Main article: Interpretation (logic)  Theorems and theories   Main articles: Theory and Theory (mathematical logic) Statement that is taken to be true  Not to be confused with axion or axon .
Several terms  redirect here.
For other uses, see Axiom (disambiguation) , Axiomatic (disambiguation) , and Postulation (algebraic geometry) .
An axiom , postulate , or assumption is a statement that is taken to be true , to serve as a premise or starting point for further reasoning and arguments.
The word comes from the Ancient Greek word ἀξίωμα ( axíōma ), meaning 'that which is thought worthy or fit' or 'that which commends itself as evident'.
The precise definition varies across fields of study.
In classic philosophy , an axiom is a statement that is so evident or well-established, that it is accepted without controversy or question.
In modern logic , an axiom is a premise or starting point for reasoning.
In mathematics , an axiom may be a " logical axiom " or a " non-logical axiom ".
Logical axioms are taken to be true within the system of logic they define and are often shown in symbolic form (e.g., ( A and B ) implies A ), while non-logical axioms (e.g., a + b = b + a ) are substantive assertions about the elements of the domain of a specific mathematical theory, such as arithmetic .
Non-logical axioms may also be called "postulates" or "assumptions".
In most cases, a non-logical axiom is simply a formal logical expression used in deduction to build a mathematical theory, and might or might not be self-evident in nature (e.g., the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry ).
To axiomatize a system of knowledge is to show that its claims can be derived from a small, well-understood set of sentences (the axioms), and there are typically many ways to axiomatize a given mathematical domain.
Any axiom is a statement that serves as a starting point from which other statements are logically derived.
Whether it is meaningful (and, if so, what it means) for an axiom to be "true" is a subject of debate in the philosophy of mathematics .
Etymology   The word axiom comes from the Greek word ἀξίωμα ( axíōma ), a verbal noun from the verb ἀξιόειν ( axioein ), meaning "to deem worthy", but also "to require", which in turn comes from ἄξιος ( áxios ), meaning "being in balance", and hence "having (the same) value (as)", "worthy", "proper".
Among the ancient Greek  philosophers and mathematicians , axioms were taken to be immediately evident propositions, foundational and common to many fields of investigation, and self-evidently true without any further argument or proof.
The root meaning of the word postulate is to "demand"; for instance, Euclid demands that one agree that some things can be done (e.g., any two points can be joined by a straight line).
Ancient geometers maintained some distinction between axioms and postulates.
While commenting on Euclid's books, Proclus remarks that " Geminus held that this  Postulate should not be classed as a postulate but as an axiom, since it does not, like the first three Postulates, assert the possibility of some construction but expresses an essential property."
Boethius translated 'postulate' as petitio and called the axioms notiones communes but in later manuscripts this usage was not always strictly kept.
Historical development   Early Greeks   The logico-deductive method whereby conclusions (new knowledge) follow from premises (old knowledge) through the application of sound arguments ( syllogisms , rules of inference ) was developed by the ancient Greeks, and has become the core principle of modern mathematics.
Tautologies excluded, nothing can be deduced if nothing is assumed.
Axioms and postulates are thus the basic assumptions underlying a given body of deductive knowledge.
They are accepted without demonstration.
All other assertions ( theorems , in the case of mathematics) must be proven with the aid of these basic assumptions.
However, the interpretation of mathematical knowledge has changed from ancient times to the modern, and consequently the terms axiom and postulate hold a slightly different meaning for the present day mathematician, than they did for Aristotle and Euclid .
The ancient Greeks considered geometry as just one of several sciences , and held the theorems of geometry on par with scientific facts.
As such, they developed and used the logico-deductive method as a means of avoiding error, and for structuring and communicating knowledge.
Aristotle's posterior analytics is a definitive exposition of the classical view.
An "axiom", in classical terminology, referred to a self-evident assumption common to many branches of science.
A good example would be the assertion that:  When an equal amount is taken from equals, an equal amount results.
At the foundation of the various sciences lay certain additional hypotheses that were accepted without proof.
Such a hypothesis was termed a postulate .
While the axioms were common to many sciences, the postulates of each particular science were different.
Their validity had to be established by means of real-world experience.
Aristotle warns that the content of a science cannot be successfully communicated if the learner is in doubt about the truth of the postulates.
The classical approach is well-illustrated  by Euclid's Elements , where a list of postulates is given (common-sensical geometric facts drawn from our experience), followed by a list of "common notions" (very basic, self-evident assertions).
Postulates  It is possible to draw a straight line from any point to any other point.
It is possible to extend a line segment continuously in both directions.
It is possible to describe a circle with any center and any radius.
It is true that all right angles are equal to one another.
(" Parallel postulate ") It is true that, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, intersect on that side on which are the angles less than the two right angles.
Common notions   Things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.
If equals are added to equals, the wholes are equal.
If equals are subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.
Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.
The whole is greater than the part.
Modern development   A lesson learned by mathematics in the last 150 years is that it is useful to strip the meaning away from the mathematical assertions (axioms, postulates, propositions , theorems) and definitions.
One must concede the need for primitive notions , or undefined terms or concepts, in any study.
Such abstraction or formalization makes mathematical knowledge more general, capable of multiple different meanings, and therefore useful in multiple contexts.
Alessandro Padoa , Mario Pieri , and Giuseppe Peano were pioneers in this movement.
Structuralist mathematics goes further, and develops theories and axioms (e.g.
field theory , group theory , topology , vector spaces ) without any particular application in mind.
The distinction between an "axiom" and a "postulate" disappears.
The postulates of Euclid are profitably motivated by saying that they lead to a great wealth of geometric facts.
The truth of these complicated facts rests on the acceptance of the basic hypotheses.
However, by throwing out Euclid's fifth postulate, one can get theories that have meaning in wider contexts (e.g., hyperbolic geometry ).
As such, one must simply be prepared to use labels such as "line" and "parallel" with greater flexibility.
The development of hyperbolic geometry taught mathematicians that it is useful to regard postulates as purely formal statements, and not as facts based on experience.
When mathematicians employ the field axioms, the intentions are even more abstract.
The propositions of field theory do not concern any one particular application; the mathematician now works in complete abstraction.
There are many examples of fields; field theory gives correct knowledge about them all.
It is not correct to say that the axioms of field theory are "propositions that are regarded as true without proof."
Rather, the field axioms are a set of constraints.
If any given system of addition and multiplication satisfies these constraints, then one is in a position to instantly know a great deal of extra information about this system.
Modern mathematics formalizes its foundations to such an extent that mathematical theories can be regarded as mathematical objects, and mathematics itself can be regarded as a branch of logic .
Frege , Russell , Poincaré , Hilbert , and Gödel are some of the key figures in this development.
Another lesson learned in modern mathematics is to examine purported proofs carefully for hidden assumptions.
In the modern understanding, a set of axioms is any collection of formally stated assertions from which other formally stated assertions follow – by the application of certain well-defined rules.
In this view, logic becomes just another formal system.
A set of axioms should be consistent ; it should be impossible to derive a contradiction from the axioms.
A set of axioms should also be non-redundant; an assertion that can be deduced from other axioms need not be regarded as an axiom.
It was the early hope of modern logicians that various branches of mathematics, perhaps all of mathematics, could be derived from a consistent collection of basic axioms.
An early success of the formalist program was Hilbert's formalization  of Euclidean geometry ,  and the related demonstration of the consistency of those axioms.
In a wider context, there was an attempt to base all of mathematics on Cantor's  set theory .
Here, the emergence of Russell's paradox and similar antinomies of naïve set theory raised the possibility that any such system could turn out to be inconsistent.
The formalist project suffered a decisive setback, when in 1931 Gödel showed that it is possible, for any sufficiently large set of axioms ( Peano's axioms , for example) to construct a statement whose truth is independent of that set of axioms.
As a corollary , Gödel proved that the consistency of a theory like Peano arithmetic is an unprovable assertion within the scope of that theory.
It is reasonable to believe in the consistency of Peano arithmetic because it is satisfied by the system of natural numbers , an infinite but intuitively accessible formal system.
However, at present, there is no known way of demonstrating the consistency of the modern Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory.
Furthermore, using techniques of forcing ( Cohen ) one can show that the continuum hypothesis (Cantor) is independent of the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms.
Thus, even this very general set of axioms cannot be regarded as the definitive foundation for mathematics.
Other sciences   Experimental sciences - as opposed to mathematics and logic - also have general founding assertions from which a deductive reasoning can be built so as to express propositions that predict properties - either still general or much more specialized to a specific experimental context.
For instance, Newton's laws in classical mechanics, Maxwell's equations in classical electromagnetism, Einstein's equation in general relativity, Mendel's laws of genetics, Darwin's Natural selection law, etc.
These founding assertions are usually called principles or postulates so as to distinguish from mathematical axioms .
As a matter of facts, the role of axioms in mathematics and postulates in experimental sciences is different.
In mathematics one neither "proves" nor "disproves" an axiom.
A set of mathematical axioms gives a set of rules that fix a conceptual realm, in which the theorems logically follow.
In contrast, in experimental sciences, a set of postulates shall allow deducing results that match or do not match experimental results.
If postulates do not allow deducing experimental predictions, they do not set a scientific conceptual framework and have to be completed or made more accurate.
If the postulates allow deducing predictions of experimental results, the comparison with experiments allows falsifying ( falsified ) the theory that the postulates install.
A theory is considered valid as long as it has not been falsified.
Now, the transition between the mathematical axioms and  scientific postulates is always slightly blurred, especially in physics.
This is due to the heavy use of mathematical tools to support the physical theories.
For instance, the introduction of Newton's laws rarely establishes as a prerequisite neither Euclidean geometry or differential calculus that they imply.
It became more apparent when Albert Einstein first introduced special relativity where the invariant quantity is no more the Euclidean length     l    {\displaystyle l}   (defined as      l   2    =   x   2    +   y   2    +   z   2      {\displaystyle l^{2}=x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}   ) > but the Minkowski spacetime interval     s    {\displaystyle s}   (defined as      s   2    =   c   2     t   2    −   x   2    −   y   2    −   z   2      {\displaystyle s^{2}=c^{2}t^{2}-x^{2}-y^{2}-z^{2}}   ), and then general relativity where flat Minkowskian geometry is replaced with pseudo-Riemannian geometry on curved manifolds .
In quantum physics, two sets of postulates have coexisted for some time, which provide a very nice example of falsification.
The ' Copenhagen school ' ( Niels Bohr , Werner Heisenberg , Max Born ) developed an operational approach with a complete mathematical formalism that involves the description of quantum system by vectors ('states') in a separable Hilbert space, and physical quantities as linear operators that act in this Hilbert space.
This approach is fully falsifiable and has so far produced the most accurate predictions in physics.
But it has the unsatisfactory aspect of not allowing answers to questions one would naturally ask.
For this reason, another ' hidden variables ' approach was developed for some time by Albert Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger , David Bohm .
It was created so as to try to give deterministic explanation to phenomena such as entanglement .
This approach assumed that the Copenhagen school description was not complete, and postulated that some yet unknown variable was to be added to the theory so as to allow answering some of the questions it does not answer (the founding elements of which were discussed as the EPR paradox in 1935).
Taking this ideas seriously, John Bell derived in 1964 a prediction that would lead to different experimental results ( Bell's inequalities ) in the Copenhagen and the Hidden variable case.
The experiment was conducted first by Alain Aspect in the early 1980's, and the result excluded the simple hidden variable approach (sophisticated hidden variables could still exist but their properties would still be more disturbing than the problems they try to solve).
This does not mean that the conceptual framework of quantum physics can be considered as complete now, since some open questions still exist (the limit between the quantum and classical realms, what happens during a quantum measurement, what happens in a completely closed quantum system such as the universe itself, etc.).
Mathematical logic   In the field of mathematical logic , a clear distinction is made between two notions of axioms: logical and non-logical (somewhat similar to the ancient distinction between "axioms" and "postulates" respectively).
Logical axioms   These are certain formulas in a formal language that are universally valid , that is, formulas that are satisfied by every assignment of values.
Usually one takes as logical axioms at least some minimal set of tautologies that is sufficient for proving all tautologies in the language; in the case of predicate logic more logical axioms than that are required, in order to prove logical truths that are not tautologies in the strict sense.
Examples   Propositional logic   In propositional logic it is common to take as logical axioms all formulae of the following forms, where     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   ,     χ    {\displaystyle \chi }   , and     ψ    {\displaystyle \psi }   can be any formulae of the language and where the included primitive connectives are only "     ¬    {\displaystyle \neg }   " for negation of the immediately following proposition and "     →    {\displaystyle \to }   " for implication from antecedent to consequent propositions:      ϕ  →  (  ψ  →  ϕ  )    {\displaystyle \phi \to (\psi \to \phi )}        (  ϕ  →  (  ψ  →  χ  )  )  →  (  (  ϕ  →  ψ  )  →  (  ϕ  →  χ  )  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \to (\psi \to \chi ))\to ((\phi \to \psi )\to (\phi \to \chi ))}        (  ¬  ϕ  →  ¬  ψ  )  →  (  ψ  →  ϕ  )  .
{\displaystyle (\lnot \phi \to \lnot \psi )\to (\psi \to \phi ).}
Each of these patterns is an axiom schema , a rule for generating an infinite number of axioms.
For example, if     A    {\displaystyle A}   ,     B    {\displaystyle B}   , and     C    {\displaystyle C}   are propositional variables , then     A  →  (  B  →  A  )    {\displaystyle A\to (B\to A)}   and     (  A  →  ¬  B  )  →  (  C  →  (  A  →  ¬  B  )  )    {\displaystyle (A\to \lnot B)\to (C\to (A\to \lnot B))}   are both instances of axiom schema 1, and hence are axioms.
It can be shown that with only these three axiom schemata and modus ponens , one can prove all tautologies of the propositional calculus.
It can also be shown that no pair of these schemata is sufficient for proving all tautologies with modus ponens .
Other axiom schemata involving the same or different sets of primitive connectives can be alternatively constructed.
These axiom schemata are also used in the predicate calculus , but additional logical axioms are needed to include a quantifier in the calculus.
First-order logic    Axiom of Equality.
Let       L      {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {L}}}   be a first-order language .
For each variable     x    {\displaystyle x}   , the below formula is universally valid.
x  =  x    {\displaystyle x=x}       This means that, for any variable symbol      x    {\displaystyle x}   , the formula     x  =  x    {\displaystyle x=x}   can be regarded as an axiom.
Also, in this example, for this not to fall into vagueness and a never-ending series of "primitive notions", either a precise notion of what we mean by     x  =  x    {\displaystyle x=x}   (or, for that matter, "to be equal") has to be well established first, or a purely formal and syntactical usage of the symbol     =    {\displaystyle =}   has to be enforced, only regarding it as a string and only a string of symbols, and mathematical logic does indeed do that.
Another, more interesting example axiom scheme , is that which provides us with what is known as Universal Instantiation :   Axiom scheme for Universal Instantiation.
Given a formula     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   in a first-order language       L      {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {L}}}   , a variable     x    {\displaystyle x}   and a term      t    {\displaystyle t}   that is substitutable for     x    {\displaystyle x}   in     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   , the below formula is universally valid.
∀  x   ϕ  →   ϕ   t    x      {\displaystyle \forall x\,\phi \to \phi _{t}^{x}}       Where the symbol      ϕ   t    x      {\displaystyle \phi _{t}^{x}}   stands for the formula     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   with the term     t    {\displaystyle t}   substituted for     x    {\displaystyle x}   .
(See Substitution of variables .)
In informal terms, this example allows us to state that, if we know that a certain property     P    {\displaystyle P}   holds for every     x    {\displaystyle x}   and that     t    {\displaystyle t}   stands for a particular object in our structure, then we should be able to claim     P  (  t  )    {\displaystyle P(t)}   .
Again, we are claiming that the formula      ∀  x  ϕ  →   ϕ   t    x      {\displaystyle \forall x\phi \to \phi _{t}^{x}}    is valid , that is, we must be able to give a "proof" of this fact, or more properly speaking, a metaproof .
These examples are metatheorems of our theory of mathematical logic since we are dealing with the very concept of proof itself.
Aside from this, we can also have Existential Generalization :   Axiom scheme for Existential Generalization.
Given a formula     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   in a first-order language       L      {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {L}}}   , a variable     x    {\displaystyle x}   and a term     t    {\displaystyle t}   that is substitutable for     x    {\displaystyle x}   in     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   , the below formula is universally valid.
ϕ   t    x    →  ∃  x   ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi _{t}^{x}\to \exists x\,\phi }       Non-logical axioms   Non-logical axioms are formulas that play the role of theory-specific assumptions.
Reasoning about two different structures, for example, the natural numbers and the integers , may involve the same logical axioms; the non-logical axioms aim to capture what is special about a particular structure (or set of structures, such as groups ).
Thus non-logical axioms, unlike logical axioms, are not tautologies .
Another name for a non-logical axiom is postulate .
Almost every modern mathematical theory starts from a given set of non-logical axioms, and it was thought that, in principle, every theory could be axiomatized in this way and formalized down to the bare language of logical formulas.
Non-logical axioms are often simply referred to as axioms in mathematical discourse .
This does not mean that it is claimed that they are true in some absolute sense.
For example, in some groups, the group operation is commutative , and this can be asserted with the introduction of an additional axiom, but without this axiom, we can do quite well developing (the more general) group theory, and we can even take its negation as an axiom for the study of non-commutative groups.
Thus, an axiom is an elementary basis for a formal logic system that together with the rules of inference define a deductive system .
Examples   This section gives examples of mathematical theories that are developed entirely from a set of non-logical axioms (axioms, henceforth).
A rigorous treatment of any of these topics begins with a specification of these axioms.
Basic theories, such as arithmetic , real analysis and complex analysis are often introduced non-axiomatically, but implicitly or explicitly there is generally an assumption that the axioms being used are the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with choice, abbreviated ZFC, or some very similar system of axiomatic set theory like Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory , a conservative extension of ZFC.
Sometimes slightly stronger theories such as Morse–Kelley set theory or set theory with a strongly inaccessible cardinal allowing the use of a Grothendieck universe is used, but in fact, most mathematicians can actually prove all they need in systems weaker than ZFC, such as second-order arithmetic .
The study of topology in mathematics extends all over through point set topology , algebraic topology , differential topology , and all the related paraphernalia, such as homology theory , homotopy theory .
The development of abstract algebra brought with itself group theory , rings , fields , and Galois theory .
This list could be expanded to include most fields of mathematics, including measure theory , ergodic theory , probability , representation theory , and differential geometry .
Arithmetic   The Peano axioms are the most widely used axiomatization of first-order arithmetic .
They are a set of axioms strong enough to prove many important facts about number theory and they allowed Gödel to establish his famous second incompleteness theorem .
We have a language        L     N  T    =  {  0  ,  S  }    {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {L}}_{NT}=\{0,S\}}   where     0    {\displaystyle 0}   is a constant symbol and     S    {\displaystyle S}   is a unary function and the following axioms:      ∀  x  .
¬  (  S  x  =  0  )    {\displaystyle \forall x.\lnot (Sx=0)}        ∀  x  .
∀  y  .
(  S  x  =  S  y  →  x  =  y  )    {\displaystyle \forall x.\forall y.
(Sx=Sy\to x=y)}        (  ϕ  (  0  )  ∧  ∀  x  .
(  ϕ  (  x  )  →  ϕ  (  S  x  )  )  )  →  ∀  x  .
ϕ  (  x  )    {\displaystyle (\phi (0)\land \forall x.\,(\phi (x)\to \phi (Sx)))\to \forall x.\phi (x)}   for any        L     N  T      {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {L}}_{NT}}   formula     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   with one free variable.
The standard structure is       N    =  ⟨   N   ,  0  ,  S  ⟩    {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {N}}=\langle \mathbb {N} ,0,S\rangle }   where      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   is the set of natural numbers,     S    {\displaystyle S}   is the successor function and     0    {\displaystyle 0}   is naturally interpreted as the number 0.
Euclidean geometry   Probably the oldest, and most famous, list of axioms are the 4 + 1 Euclid's postulates of plane geometry .
The axioms are referred to as "4 + 1" because for nearly two millennia the fifth (parallel) postulate ("through a point outside a line there is exactly one parallel") was suspected of being derivable from the first four.
Ultimately, the fifth postulate was found to be independent of the first four.
One can assume that exactly one parallel through a point outside a line exists, or that infinitely many exist.
This choice gives us two alternative forms of geometry in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to exactly 180 degrees or less, respectively, and are known as Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries.
If one also removes the second postulate ("a line can be extended indefinitely") then elliptic geometry arises, where there is no parallel through a point outside a line, and in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to more than 180 degrees.
Real analysis   The objectives of the study are within the domain of real numbers .
The real numbers are uniquely picked out (up to isomorphism ) by the properties of a Dedekind complete ordered field , meaning that any nonempty set of real numbers with an upper bound has a least upper bound.
However, expressing these properties as axioms requires the use of second-order logic .
The Löwenheim–Skolem theorems tell us that if we restrict ourselves to first-order logic , any axiom system for the reals admits other models, including both models that are smaller than the reals and models that are larger.
Some of the latter are studied in non-standard analysis .
Role in mathematical logic   Deductive systems and completeness   A deductive system consists of a set     Λ    {\displaystyle \Lambda }   of logical axioms, a set     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   of non-logical axioms, and a set     {  (  Γ  ,  ϕ  )  }    {\displaystyle \{(\Gamma ,\phi )\}}   of rules of inference .
A desirable property of a deductive system is that it be complete .
A system is said to be complete if, for all formulas     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   ,        if   Σ  ⊨  ϕ   then   Σ  ⊢  ϕ    {\displaystyle {\text{if }}\Sigma \models \phi {\text{ then }}\Sigma \vdash \phi }      that is, for any statement that is a logical consequence of     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   there actually exists a deduction of the statement from     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   .
This is sometimes expressed as "everything that is true is provable", but it must be understood that "true" here means "made true by the set of axioms", and not, for example, "true in the intended interpretation".
Gödel's completeness theorem establishes the completeness of a certain commonly used type of deductive system.
Note that "completeness" has a different meaning here than it does in the context of Gödel's first incompleteness theorem , which states that no recursive , consistent set of non-logical axioms     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   of the Theory of Arithmetic is complete , in the sense that there will always exist an arithmetic statement     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   such that neither     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   nor     ¬  ϕ    {\displaystyle \lnot \phi }   can be proved from the given set of axioms.
There is thus, on the one hand, the notion of completeness of a deductive system and on the other hand that of completeness of a set of non-logical axioms .
The completeness theorem and the incompleteness theorem, despite their names, do not contradict one another.
Further discussion   Early mathematicians regarded axiomatic geometry as a model of physical space , and obviously, there could only be one such model.
The idea that alternative mathematical systems might exist was very troubling to mathematicians of the 19th century and the developers of systems such as Boolean algebra made elaborate efforts to derive them from traditional arithmetic.
Galois showed just before his untimely death that these efforts were largely wasted.
Ultimately, the abstract parallels between algebraic systems were seen to be more important than the details, and modern algebra was born.
In the modern view, axioms may be any set of formulas, as long as they are not known to be inconsistent.
Steps in reasoning  For the 1992 album by pianist Marilyn Crispell and saxophonist Tim Berne, see Inference (album) .
For the process in statistics and machine learning, see Statistical inference .
This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .
Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.
( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Inferences are steps in reasoning , moving from premises to logical consequences ; etymologically, the word infer means to "carry forward".
Inference is theoretically traditionally divided into deduction and induction , a distinction that in Europe dates at least to Aristotle (300s BCE).
Deduction is inference deriving  logical conclusions from premises known or assumed to be true , with the laws of valid inference being studied in logic .
Induction is inference from particular evidence to a universal conclusion.
A third type of inference is sometimes distinguished, notably by Charles Sanders Peirce , contradistinguishing abduction from induction.
Various fields study how inference is done in practice.
Human inference (i.e.
how humans draw conclusions) is traditionally studied within the fields of logic, argumentation studies, and cognitive psychology ; artificial intelligence researchers develop automated inference systems to emulate human inference.
Statistical inference uses mathematics to draw conclusions in the presence of uncertainty.
This generalizes deterministic reasoning, with the absence of uncertainty as a special case.
Statistical inference uses quantitative or qualitative ( categorical ) data which may be subject to random variations.
Definition   The process by which a conclusion is inferred from multiple observations is called inductive reasoning .
The conclusion may be correct or incorrect, or correct to within a certain degree of accuracy, or correct in certain situations.
Conclusions inferred from multiple observations may be tested by additional observations.
This definition is disputable (due to its lack of clarity.
Ref: Oxford English dictionary: "induction ...
3.
Logic the inference of a general law from particular instances."
) The definition given thus applies only when the "conclusion" is general.
Two possible definitions of "inference" are:  A conclusion reached on the basis of evidence and reasoning.
The process of reaching such a conclusion.
Examples   Example for definition #1   Ancient Greek philosophers defined a number of syllogisms , correct three part inferences, that can be used as building blocks for more complex reasoning.
We begin with a famous example:  All humans are mortal.
All Greeks are humans.
All Greeks are mortal.
The reader can check that the premises and conclusion are true, but logic is concerned with inference: does the truth of the conclusion follow from that of the premises?
The validity of an inference depends on the form of the inference.
That is, the word "valid" does not refer to the truth of the premises or the conclusion, but rather to the form of the inference.
An inference can be valid even if the parts are false, and can be invalid even if some parts are true.
But a valid form with true premises will always have a true conclusion.
For example, consider the form of the following symbological track:  All meat comes from animals.
All beef is meat.
Therefore, all beef comes from animals.
If the premises are true, then the conclusion is necessarily true, too.
Now we turn to an invalid form.
All A are B.
All C are B.
Therefore, all C are A.
To show that this form is invalid, we demonstrate how it can lead from true premises to a false conclusion.
All apples are fruit.
(True)  All bananas are fruit.
(True)  Therefore, all bananas are apples.
(False)  A valid argument with a false premise may lead to a false conclusion, (this and the following examples do not follow the Greek syllogism):  All tall people are French.
(False)  John Lennon was tall.
(True)  Therefore, John Lennon was French.
(False)  When a valid argument is used to derive a false conclusion from a false premise, the inference is valid because it follows the form of a correct inference.
A valid argument can also be used to derive a true conclusion from a false premise:  All tall people are musicians.
(Valid, False)  John Lennon was tall.
(Valid, True)  Therefore, John Lennon was a musician.
(Valid, True)  In this case we have one false premise and one true premise where a true conclusion has been inferred.
Example for definition #2   Evidence: It is the early 1950s and you are an American stationed in the Soviet Union .
You read in the Moscow newspaper that a soccer team from a small city in Siberia starts winning game after game.
The team even defeats the Moscow team.
Inference: The small city in Siberia is not a small city anymore.
The Soviets are working on their own nuclear or high-value secret weapons program.
Knowns: The Soviet Union is a command economy : people and material are told where to go and what to do.
The small city was remote and historically had never distinguished itself; its soccer season was typically short because of the weather.
Explanation: In a command economy , people and material are moved where they are needed.
Large cities might field good teams due to the greater availability of high quality players; and teams that can practice longer (possibly due to sunnier weather and better facilities) can reasonably be expected to be better.
In addition, you put your best and brightest in places where they can do the most good—such as on high-value weapons programs.
It is an anomaly for a small city to field such a good team.
The anomaly indirectly described a condition by which the observer inferred a new meaningful pattern—that the small city was no longer small.
Why would you put a large city of your best and brightest in the middle of nowhere?
To hide them, of course.
Incorrect inference   An incorrect inference is known as a fallacy .
Philosophers who study informal logic have compiled large lists of them, and cognitive psychologists have documented many biases in human reasoning that favor incorrect reasoning.
Applications   Inference engines   Main articles: Reasoning system , Inference engine , expert system , and business rule engine  AI systems first provided automated logical inference and these were once extremely popular research topics, leading to industrial applications under the form of expert systems and later business rule engines .
More recent work on automated theorem proving has had a stronger
basis in formal logic.
An inference system's job is to extend a knowledge base automatically.
The knowledge base (KB) is a set of propositions that represent what the system knows about the world.
Several techniques can be used by that system to extend KB by means of valid inferences.
An additional requirement is that the conclusions the system arrives at are relevant to its task.
Additionally, the term 'inference' has also been applied to the process of generating predictions from trained neural networks .
In this context, an 'inference engine' refers to the system or hardware performing these operations.
This type of inference is widely used in applications ranging from image recognition to natural language processing .
Prolog engine   Prolog (for "Programming in Logic") is a programming language based on a subset of predicate calculus .
Its main job is to check whether a certain proposition can be inferred from a KB (knowledge base) using an algorithm called backward chaining .
Let us return to our Socrates  syllogism .
We enter into our Knowledge Base the following piece of code:  mortal(X) :- 	man(X).
man(socrates).
( Here :- can be read as "if".
Generally, if P     →    {\displaystyle \to }   Q (if P then Q) then in Prolog we would code Q :- P (Q if P).)
This states that all men are mortal and that Socrates is a man.
Now we can ask the Prolog system about Socrates:  ?- mortal(socrates).
(where ?- signifies a query: Can mortal(socrates).
be deduced from the KB using the rules)
gives the answer "Yes".
On the other hand, asking the Prolog system the following:  ?- mortal(plato).
gives the answer "No".
This is because Prolog does not know anything about Plato , and hence defaults to any property about Plato being false (the so-called closed world assumption ).
Finally
?- mortal(X) (Is anything mortal) would result in "Yes" (and in some implementations: "Yes": X=socrates)  Prolog can be used for vastly more complicated inference tasks.
See the corresponding article for further examples.
Semantic web   Recently automatic reasoners found in semantic web a new field of application.
Being based upon description logic , knowledge expressed using one variant of OWL can be logically processed, i.e., inferences can be made upon it.
Bayesian statistics and probability logic   Main article: Bayesian inference  Philosophers and scientists who follow the Bayesian framework for inference use the mathematical rules of probability to find this best explanation.
The Bayesian view has a number of desirable features—one of them is that it embeds deductive (certain) logic as a subset (this prompts some writers to call Bayesian probability "probability logic", following E.
T.
Jaynes ).
Bayesians identify probabilities with degrees of beliefs, with certainly true propositions having probability 1, and certainly false propositions having probability 0.
To say that "it's going to rain tomorrow" has a 0.9 probability is to say that you consider the possibility of rain tomorrow as extremely likely.
Through the rules of probability, the probability of a conclusion and of alternatives can be calculated.
The best explanation is most often identified with the most probable (see Bayesian decision theory ).
A central rule of Bayesian inference is Bayes' theorem .
Fuzzy logic   Main article: Fuzzy logic  This section needs expansion .
( October 2016 )  Non-monotonic logic   Main article: Non-monotonic logic   A relation of inference is monotonic if the addition of premises does not undermine previously reached conclusions; otherwise the relation is non-monotonic .
Deductive inference is monotonic: if a conclusion is reached on the basis of a certain set of premises, then that conclusion still holds if more premises are added.
By contrast, everyday reasoning is mostly non-monotonic because it involves risk: we jump to conclusions from deductively insufficient premises.
We know when it is worth or even necessary (e.g.
in medical diagnosis) to take the risk.
Yet we are also aware that such inference is defeasible—that new information may undermine old conclusions.
Various kinds of defeasible but remarkably successful inference have traditionally captured the attention of philosophers (theories of induction, Peirce's theory of abduction , inference to the best explanation, etc.).
More recently logicians have begun to approach the phenomenon from a formal point of view.
The result is a large body of theories at the interface of philosophy, logic and artificial intelligence.
Knowledge acquired by means of the senses  "Empirical" redirects here.
For other uses, see Empirical (disambiguation) .
Empirical evidence for a proposition is evidence , i.e.
what supports or counters this proposition, that is constituted by or accessible to sense experience or experimental procedure.
Empirical evidence is of central importance to the sciences and plays a role in various other fields, like epistemology and law .
There is no general agreement on how the terms evidence and empirical are to be defined.
Often different fields work with quite different conceptions.
In epistemology, evidence is what justifies  beliefs or what determines whether holding a certain belief is rational .
This is only possible if the evidence is possessed by the person, which has prompted various epistemologists to conceive evidence as private mental states like experiences or other beliefs.
In philosophy of science , on the other hand, evidence is understood as that which confirms or disconfirms  scientific hypotheses and arbitrates between competing theories.
For this role, it is important that evidence is public and uncontroversial, like observable physical objects or events and unlike private mental states, so that evidence may foster scientific consensus .
The term empirical comes from Greek ἐμπειρία empeiría , i.e.
'experience'.
In this context, it is usually understood as what is observable, in contrast to unobservable or theoretical objects.
It is generally accepted that unaided perception constitutes observation, but it is disputed to what extent objects accessible only to aided perception, like bacteria seen through a microscope or positrons detected in a cloud chamber, should be regarded as observable.
Empirical evidence is essential to a posteriori knowledge or empirical knowledge , knowledge whose justification or falsification depends on experience or experiment.
A priori knowledge, on the other hand, is seen either as innate or as justified by rational intuition and therefore as not dependent on empirical evidence.
Rationalism fully accepts that there is knowledge a priori , which is either outright rejected by empiricism or accepted only in a restricted way as knowledge of relations between our concepts but not as pertaining to the external world.
Scientific evidence is closely related to empirical evidence but not all forms of empirical evidence meet the standards dictated by scientific methods .
Sources of empirical evidence are sometimes divided into observation and experimentation , the difference being that only experimentation involves manipulation or intervention: phenomena are actively created instead of being passively observed.
Background   Main article: Evidence  The concept of evidence is of central importance in epistemology and in philosophy of science but plays different roles in these two fields.
In epistemology, evidence is what justifies  beliefs or what determines whether holding a certain doxastic attitude is rational .
For example, the olfactory experience of smelling smoke justifies or makes it rational to hold the belief that something is burning.
It is usually held that for justification to work, the evidence has to be possessed by the believer.
The most straightforward way to account for this type of evidence possession is to hold that evidence consists of the private mental states possessed by the believer.
Some philosophers restrict evidence even further, for example, to only conscious, propositional or factive mental states.
Restricting evidence to conscious mental states has the implausible consequence that many simple everyday beliefs would be unjustified.
This is why it is more common to hold that all kinds of mental states, including stored but currently unconscious beliefs, can act as evidence.
Various of the roles played by evidence in reasoning, for example, in explanatory, probabilistic and deductive reasoning, suggest that evidence has to be propositional in nature, i.e.
that it is correctly expressed by propositional attitude verbs like "believe" together with a that-clause, like "that something is burning".
But it runs counter to the common practice of treating non-propositional sense-experiences, like bodily pains, as evidence.
Its defenders sometimes combine it with the view that evidence has to be factive, i.e.
that only attitudes towards true propositions constitute evidence.
In this view, there is no misleading evidence.
The olfactory experience of smoke would count as evidence if it was produced by a fire but not if it was produced by a smoke generator.
This position has problems in explaining why it is still rational for the subject to believe that there is a fire even though the olfactory experience cannot be considered evidence.
In philosophy of science, evidence is understood as that which confirms or disconfirms  scientific hypotheses and arbitrates between competing theories.
Measurements of Mercury's "anomalous" orbit, for example, constitute evidence that plays the role of neutral arbiter between Newton's and Einstein's theory of gravitation by confirming Einstein's theory.
For scientific consensus, it is central that evidence is public and uncontroversial, like observable physical objects or events and unlike private mental states.
This way it can act as a shared ground for proponents of competing theories.
Two issues threatening this role are the problem of underdetermination and theory-ladenness .
The problem of underdetermination concerns the fact that the available evidence often provides equal support to either theory and therefore cannot arbitrate between them.
Theory-ladenness refers to the idea that evidence already includes theoretical assumptions.
These assumptions can hinder it from acting as neutral arbiter.
It can also lead to a lack of shared evidence if different scientists do not share these assumptions.
Thomas Kuhn is an important advocate of the position that theory-ladenness in relation to scientific paradigms plays a central role in science.
Definition   A thing is evidence for a proposition if it epistemically supports this proposition or indicates that the supported proposition is true.
Evidence is empirical if it is constituted by or accessible to sensory experience.
There are various competing theories about the exact definition of the terms evidence and empirical .
Different fields, like epistemology, the sciences or legal systems, often associate different concepts with these terms.
An important distinction among theories of evidence is whether they identify evidence with private mental states or with public physical objects.
Concerning the term empirical , there is a dispute about where to draw the line between observable or empirical objects in contrast to unobservable or merely theoretical objects.
The traditional view proposes that evidence is empirical if it is constituted by or accessible to sensory experience.
This involves experiences arising from the stimulation of the sense organs, like visual or auditory experiences,  but the term is often used in a wider sense including memories and introspection.
It is usually seen as excluding purely intellectual experiences, like rational insights or intuitions used to justify basic logical or mathematical principles.
The terms empirical and observable are closely related and sometimes used as synonyms.
There is an active debate in contemporary philosophy of science as to what should be regarded as observable or empirical in contrast to unobservable or merely theoretical objects.
There is general consensus that everyday objects like books or houses are observable since they are accessible via unaided perception, but disagreement starts for objects that are only accessible through aided perception.
This includes using telescopes to study distant galaxies,  microscopes to study bacteria or using cloud chambers to study positrons.
So the question is whether distant galaxies, bacteria or positrons should be regarded as observable or merely theoretical objects.
Some even hold that any measurement process of an entity should be considered an observation of this entity.
In this sense, the interior of the Sun is observable since neutrinos originating there can be detected.
The difficulty with this debate is that there is a continuity of cases going from looking at something with the naked eye, through a window, through a pair of glasses, through a microscope, etc.
Because of this continuity, drawing the line between any two adjacent cases seems to be arbitrary.
One way to avoid these difficulties is to hold that it is a mistake to identify the empirical with what is observable or sensible.
Instead, it has been suggested that empirical evidence can include unobservable entities as long as they are detectable through suitable measurements.
A problem with this approach is that it is rather far from the original meaning of "empirical", which contains the reference to experience.
Related concepts   Knowledge a posteriori and a priori   Main article: A priori and a posteriori  Knowledge or the justification of a belief is said to be a posteriori if it is based on empirical evidence.
A posteriori refers to what depends on experience (what comes after experience), in contrast to a priori , which stands for what is independent of experience (what comes before experience).
For example, the proposition that "all bachelors are unmarried" is knowable a priori since its truth only depends on the meanings of the words used in the expression.
The proposition "some bachelors are happy", on the other hand, is only knowable a posteriori since it depends on experience of the world as its justifier.
Immanuel Kant held that the difference between a posteriori and a priori is tantamount to the distinction between empirical and non-empirical knowledge.
Two central questions for this distinction concern the relevant sense of "experience" and of "dependence".
The paradigmatic justification of knowledge a posteriori consists in sensory experience, but other mental phenomena, like memory or introspection, are also usually included in it.
But purely intellectual experiences, like rational insights or intuitions used to justify basic logical or mathematical principles, are normally excluded from it.
There are different senses in which knowledge may be said to depend on experience.
In order to know a proposition, the subject has to be able to entertain this proposition, i.e.
possess the relevant concepts.
For example, experience is necessary to entertain the proposition "if something is red all over then it is not green all over" because the terms "red" and "green" have to be acquired this way.
But the sense of dependence most relevant to empirical evidence concerns the status of justification of a belief.
So experience may be needed to acquire the relevant concepts in the example above, but once these concepts are possessed, no further experience providing empirical evidence is needed to know that the proposition is true, which is why it is considered to be justified a priori .
Empiricism and rationalism   In its strictest sense, empiricism is the view that all knowledge is based on experience or that all epistemic justification arises from empirical evidence.
This stands in contrast to the rationalist view, which holds that some knowledge is independent of experience, either because it is innate or because it is justified by reason or rational reflection alone.
Expressed through the distinction between knowledge a priori and a posteriori from the previous section, rationalism affirms that there is knowledge a priori, which is denied by empiricism in this strict form.
One difficulty for empiricists is to account for the justification of knowledge pertaining to fields like mathematics and logic, for example, that 3 is a prime number or that modus ponens is a valid form of deduction.
The difficulty is due to the fact that there seems to be no good candidate of empirical evidence that could justify these beliefs.
Such cases have prompted empiricists to allow for certain forms of knowledge a priori, for example, concerning tautologies or relations between our concepts.
These concessions preserve the spirit of empiricism insofar as the restriction to experience still applies to knowledge about the external world.
In some fields, like metaphysics or ethics , the choice between empiricism and rationalism makes a difference not just for how a given claim is justified but for whether it is justified at all.
This is best exemplified in metaphysics, where empiricists tend to take a skeptical position, thereby denying the existence of metaphysical knowledge, while rationalists seek justification for metaphysical claims in metaphysical intuitions.
Scientific evidence   Main article: Scientific evidence  Scientific evidence is closely related to empirical evidence.
Some theorists, like Carlos Santana, have argued that there is a sense in which not all empirical evidence constitutes scientific evidence.
One reason for this is that the standards or criteria that scientists apply to evidence exclude certain evidence that is legitimate in other contexts.
For example, anecdotal evidence from a friend about how to treat a certain disease constitutes empirical evidence that this treatment works but would not be considered scientific evidence.
Others have argued that the traditional empiricist definition of empirical evidence as perceptual evidence is too narrow for much of scientific practice, which uses evidence from various kinds of non-perceptual equipment.
Central to scientific evidence is that it was arrived at by following scientific method in the context of some scientific theory .
But people rely on various forms of empirical evidence in their everyday lives that have not been obtained this way and therefore do not qualify as scientific evidence.
One problem with non-scientific evidence is that it is less reliable, for example, due to cognitive biases like the anchoring effect ,  in which information obtained earlier is given more weight, although science done poorly is also subject to such biases, as in the example of p -hacking .
Observation, experimentation and scientific method   In the philosophy of science, it is sometimes held that there are two sources of empirical evidence: observation and experimentation .
The idea behind this distinction is that only experimentation involves manipulation or intervention: phenomena are actively created instead of being passively observed.
For example, inserting viral DNA into a bacterium is a form of experimentation while studying planetary orbits through a telescope belongs to mere observation.
In these cases, the mutated DNA was actively produced by the biologist while the planetary orbits are independent of the astronomer observing them.
Applied to the history of science, it is sometimes held that ancient science is mainly observational while the emphasis on experimentation is only present in modern science and responsible for the scientific revolution .
This is sometimes phrased through the expression that modern science actively "puts questions to nature".
This distinction also underlies the categorization of sciences into experimental sciences, like physics, and observational sciences, like astronomy.
While the distinction is relatively intuitive in paradigmatic cases, it has proven difficult to give a general definition of "intervention" applying to all cases, which is why it is sometimes outright rejected.
Empirical evidence is required for a hypothesis to gain acceptance in the scientific community .
Normally, this validation is achieved by the scientific method of forming a hypothesis, experimental design , peer review , reproduction of results , conference presentation, and journal publication .
This requires rigorous communication of hypothesis (usually expressed in mathematics), experimental constraints and controls (expressed in terms of standard experimental apparatus), and a common understanding of measurement.
In the scientific context, the term semi-empirical is used for qualifying theoretical methods that use, in part, basic axioms or postulated scientific laws and experimental results.
Such methods are opposed to theoretical ab initio methods, which are purely deductive and based on first principles .
Typical examples of both ab initio and semi-empirical methods can be found in computational chemistry .
Method of logical reasoning  "Inductive inference" redirects here.
Not to be confused with mathematical induction , which is actually a form of deductive rather than inductive reasoning.
Inductive reasoning is any of various methods of reasoning in which broad generalizations or principles are derived from a body of observations.
This article is concerned with the inductive reasoning other than deductive reasoning (such as mathematical induction ), where the conclusion of a deductive argument is certain given the premises are correct; in contrast, the truth of the conclusion of an inductive argument is at best probable , based upon the evidence given.
Types   The types of inductive reasoning include generalization, prediction, statistical syllogism, argument from analogy, and causal inference.
There are also differences in how their results are regarded.
Inductive generalization   A generalization (more accurately, an inductive generalization ) proceeds from premises about a sample to a conclusion about the population .
The observation obtained from this sample is projected onto the broader population.
The proportion Q of the sample has attribute A.
Therefore, the proportion Q of the population has attribute A.
For example, if there are 20 balls—either black or white—in an urn, to estimate their respective numbers, a sample of four balls is drawn, three are black and one is white.
An inductive generalization is that there are 15 black and five white balls in the urn.
How much the premises support the conclusion depends upon the number in the sample group, the number in the population, and the degree to which the sample represents the population (which, for a static population, may be achieved by taking a random sample).
The greater the sample size relative to the population and the more closely the sample represents the population, the stronger the generalization is.
The hasty generalization and the biased sample are generalization fallacies.
Statistical generalization   A statistical generalization is a type of inductive argument in which a conclusion about a population is inferred using a statistically representative sample .
For example:  Of a sizeable random sample of voters surveyed, 66% support Measure Z.
Therefore, approximately 66% of voters support Measure Z.
The measure is highly reliable within a well-defined margin of error provided that the selection process was genuinely random and that the numbers of items in the sample having the properties considered are large.
It is readily quantifiable.
Compare the preceding argument with the following.
"Six of the ten people in my book club are Libertarians.
Therefore, about 60% of people are Libertarians."
The argument is weak because the sample is non-random and the sample size is very small.
Statistical generalizations are also called statistical projections  and sample projections .
Anecdotal generalization   An anecdotal generalization is a type of inductive argument in which a conclusion about a population is inferred using a non-statistical sample.
In other words, the generalization is based on anecdotal evidence .
For example:  So far, this year his son's Little League team has won 6 of 10 games.
Therefore, by season's end, they will have won about 60% of the games.
This inference is less reliable (and thus more likely to commit the fallacy of hasty generalization) than a statistical generalization, first, because the sample events are non-random, and second because it is not reducible to a mathematical expression.
Statistically speaking, there is simply no way to know, measure and calculate the circumstances affecting performance that will occur in the future.
On a philosophical level, the argument relies on the presupposition that the operation of future events will mirror the past.
In other words, it takes for granted a uniformity of nature, an unproven principle that cannot be derived from the empirical data itself.
Arguments that tacitly presuppose this uniformity are sometimes called Humean after the philosopher who was first to subject them to philosophical scrutiny.
Prediction   An inductive prediction draws a conclusion about a future, current, or past instance from a sample of other instances.
Like an inductive generalization, an inductive prediction relies on a data set consisting of specific instances of a phenomenon.
But rather than conclude with a general statement, the inductive prediction concludes with a specific statement about the probability that a single instance will (or will not) have an attribute shared (or not shared) by the other instances.
Proportion Q of observed members of group G have had attribute A.
Therefore, there is a probability corresponding to Q that other members of group G will have attribute A when next observed.
Statistical syllogism   Main article: Statistical syllogism  A statistical syllogism proceeds from a generalization about a group to a conclusion about an individual.
Proportion Q of the known instances of population P has attribute A.
Individual I is another member of P.
 Therefore, there is a probability corresponding to Q that I has A.
For example:  90% of graduates from Excelsior Preparatory school go on to university.
Bob is a graduate of Excelsior Preparatory school.
Therefore, Bob will probably go on to university.
This is a statistical syllogism .
Even though one cannot be sure Bob will attend university, the exact probability of this outcome is fully assured (given no further information).
Two dicto simpliciter fallacies can occur in statistical syllogisms: " accident " and " converse accident ".
Argument from analogy   Main article: Argument from analogy  The process of analogical inference involves noting the shared properties of two or more things and from this basis inferring that they also share some further property:    P and Q are similar with respect to properties a, b, and c.
 Object P has been observed to have further property x.
Therefore, Q probably has property x also.
Analogical reasoning is very frequent in common sense , science , philosophy , law , and the humanities , but sometimes it is accepted only as an auxiliary method.
A refined approach is case-based reasoning .
Mineral A and Mineral B are both igneous rocks often containing veins of quartz and are most commonly found in South America in areas of ancient volcanic activity.
Mineral A is also a soft stone suitable for carving into jewelry.
Therefore, mineral B is probably a soft stone suitable for carving into jewelry.
This is analogical induction , according to which things alike in certain ways are more prone to be alike in other ways.
This form of induction was explored in detail by philosopher John Stuart Mill in his System of Logic , where he states, "here can be no doubt that every resemblance  affords some degree of probability, beyond what would otherwise exist, in favor of the conclusion."
See Mill's Methods .
Some thinkers contend that analogical induction is a subcategory of inductive generalization because it assumes a pre-established uniformity governing events.
Analogical induction requires an auxiliary examination of the relevancy of the characteristics cited as common to the pair.
In the preceding example, if a premise were added stating that both stones were mentioned in the records of early Spanish explorers, this common attribute is extraneous to the stones and does not contribute to their probable affinity.
A pitfall of analogy is that features can be cherry-picked : while objects may show striking similarities, two things juxtaposed may respectively possess other characteristics not identified in the analogy that are characteristics sharply dis similar.
Thus, analogy can mislead if not all relevant comparisons are made.
Causal inference   Main article: Causal reasoning  A causal inference draws a conclusion about a possible or probable causal connection based on the conditions of the occurrence of an effect.
Premises about the correlation of two things can indicate a causal relationship between them, but additional factors must be confirmed to establish the exact form of the causal relationship.
Methods   The two principal methods used to reach inductive generalizations are enumerative induction and eliminative induction.
Enumerative induction   Enumerative induction is an inductive method in which a generalization is constructed based on the number of instances that support it.
The more supporting instances, the stronger the conclusion.
The most basic form of enumerative induction reasons from particular instances to all instances and is thus an unrestricted generalization.
If one observes 100 swans, and all 100 were white, one might infer a probable universal categorical proposition of the form All swans are white .
As this reasoning form 's premises, even if true, do not entail the conclusion's truth, this is a form of inductive inference.
The conclusion might be true, and might be thought probably true, yet it can be false.
Questions regarding the justification and form of enumerative inductions have been central in philosophy of science , as enumerative induction has a pivotal role in the traditional model of the scientific method .
All life forms so far discovered are composed of cells.
Therefore, all life forms are composed of cells.
This is enumerative induction , also known as simple induction or simple predictive induction .
It is a subcategory of inductive generalization.
In everyday practice, this is perhaps the most common form of induction.
For the preceding argument, the conclusion is tempting but makes a prediction well in excess of the evidence.
First, it assumes that life forms observed until now can tell us how future cases will be: an appeal to uniformity.
Second, the conclusion All is a bold assertion.
A single contrary instance foils the argument.
And last, quantifying the level of probability in any mathematical form is problematic.
By what standard do we measure our Earthly sample of known life against all (possible) life?
Suppose we do discover some new organism—such as some microorganism floating in the mesosphere or an asteroid—and it is cellular.
Does the addition of this corroborating evidence oblige us to raise our probability assessment for the subject proposition?
It is generally deemed reasonable to answer this question "yes", and for a good many this "yes" is not only reasonable but incontrovertible.
So then just how much should this new data change our probability assessment?
Here, consensus melts away, and in its place arises a question about whether we can talk of probability coherently at all with or without numerical quantification.
All life forms so far discovered have been composed of cells.
Therefore, the next life form discovered will be composed of cells.
This is enumerative induction in its weak form .
It truncates "all" to a mere single instance and, by making a far weaker claim, considerably strengthens the probability of its conclusion.
Otherwise, it has the same shortcomings as the strong form: its sample population is non-random, and quantification methods are elusive.
Eliminative induction   Eliminative induction , also called variative induction, is an inductive method in which a generalization is constructed based on the variety of instances that support it.
Unlike enumerative induction, eliminative induction reasons based on the various kinds of instances that support a conclusion, rather than the number of instances that support it.
As the variety of instances increases, the more possible conclusions based on those instances can be identified as incompatible and eliminated.
This, in turn, increases the strength of any conclusion that remains consistent with the various instances.
This type of induction may use different methodologies such as quasi-experimentation, which tests and, where possible, eliminates rival hypotheses.
Different evidential tests may also be employed to eliminate possibilities that are entertained.
Eliminative induction is crucial to the scientific method and is used to eliminate hypotheses that are inconsistent with observations and experiments.
It focuses on possible causes instead of observed actual instances of causal connections.
This section needs expansion .
( June 2020 )  History   Ancient philosophy   For a move from particular to universal, Aristotle in the 300s BCE used the Greek word epagogé , which Cicero translated into the Latin word inductio .
Aristotle and the Peripatetic School   Aristotle's Posterior Analytics covers the methods of inductive proof in natural philosophy and in the social sciences.
The first book of Posterior Analytics describes the nature and science of demonstration and its elements: including definition, division, intuitive reason of first principles, particular and universal demonstration, affirmative and negative demonstration, the difference between science and opinion, etc.
Pyrrhonism   The ancient Pyrrhonists were the first Western philosophers to point out the Problem of induction : that induction cannot, according to them, justify the acceptance of universal statements as true.
Ancient medicine   The Empiric school of ancient Greek medicine employed epilogism as a method of inference.
'Epilogism' is a theory-free method that looks at history through the accumulation of facts without major generalization and with consideration of the consequences of making causal claims.
Epilogism is an inference which moves entirely within the domain of visible and evident things, it tries not to invoke unobservables .
The Dogmatic school of ancient Greek medicine employed analogismos as a method of inference.
This method used analogy to reason from what was observed to unobservable forces.
Early modern philosophy   In 1620, early modern philosopher  Francis Bacon repudiated the value of mere experience and enumerative induction alone.
His method of inductivism required that minute and many-varied observations that uncovered the natural world's structure and causal relations needed to be coupled with enumerative induction in order to have knowledge beyond the present scope of experience.
Inductivism therefore required enumerative induction as a component.
David Hume   The empiricist David Hume 's 1740 stance found enumerative induction to have no rational, let alone logical, basis; instead, induction was the product of instinct rather than reason, a custom of the mind and an everyday requirement to live.
While observations, such as the motion of the sun, could be coupled with the principle of the uniformity of nature to produce conclusions that seemed to be certain, the problem of induction arose from the fact that the uniformity of nature was not a logically valid principle, therefore it could not be defended as deductively rational, but also could not be defended as inductively rational by appealing to the fact that the uniformity of nature has accurately described the past and therefore, will likely accurately describe the future because that is an inductive argument and therefore circular since induction is what needs to be justified.
Since Hume first wrote about the dilemma between the invalidity of deductive arguments and the circularity of inductive arguments in support of the uniformity of nature, this supposed dichotomy between merely two modes of inference, deduction and induction, has been contested with the discovery of a third mode of inference known as abduction, or abductive reasoning , which was first formulated and advanced by Charles Sanders Peirce , in 1886, where he referred to it as "reasoning by hypothesis."
Inference to the best explanation is often, yet arguably, treated as synonymous to abduction as it was first identified by Gilbert Harman in 1965 where he referred to it as "abductive reasoning," yet his definition of abduction slightly differs from Pierce's definition.
Regardless, if abduction is in fact a third mode of inference rationally independent from the other two, then either the uniformity of nature can be rationally justified through abduction, or Hume's dilemma is more of a trilemma.
Hume was also skeptical of the application of enumerative induction and reason to reach certainty about unobservables and especially the inference of causality from the fact that modifying an aspect of a relationship prevents or produces a particular outcome.
Immanuel Kant   Awakened from "dogmatic slumber" by a German translation of Hume's work, Kant sought to explain the possibility of metaphysics .
In 1781, Kant's Critique of Pure Reason introduced rationalism as a path toward knowledge distinct from empiricism .
Kant sorted statements into two types.
Analytic statements are true by virtue of the arrangement of their terms and meanings , thus analytic statements are tautologies , merely logical truths, true by necessity .
Whereas synthetic statements hold meanings to refer to states of facts, contingencies .
Against both rationalist philosophers like Descartes and Leibniz as well as against empiricist philosophers like Locke and Hume , Kant's Critique of Pure Reason is a sustained argument that in order to have knowledge we need both a contribution of our mind (concepts) as well as a contribution of our senses (intuitions).
Knowledge proper is for Kant thus restricted to what we can possibly perceive ( phenomena ), whereas objects of mere thought (" things in themselves ") are in principle unknowable due to the impossibility of ever perceiving them.
Reasoning that the mind must contain its own categories for organizing sense data , making experience of objects in space and time ( phenomena ) possible, Kant concluded that the uniformity of nature was an a priori truth.
A class of synthetic statements that was not contingent but true by necessity, was then synthetic a priori .
Kant thus saved both metaphysics and Newton's law of universal gravitation .
On the basis of the argument that what goes beyond our knowledge is "nothing to us,"  he discarded scientific realism .
Kant's position that knowledge comes about by a cooperation of perception and our capacity to think ( transcendental idealism ) gave birth to the movement of German idealism .
Hegel 's absolute idealism subsequently flourished across continental Europe and England.
Late modern philosophy   Positivism , developed by Henri de Saint-Simon and promulgated in the 1830s by his former student Auguste Comte , was the first late modern  philosophy of science .
In the aftermath of the French Revolution , fearing society's ruin, Comte opposed metaphysics .
Human knowledge had evolved from religion to metaphysics to science, said Comte, which had flowed from mathematics to astronomy to physics to chemistry to biology to sociology —in that order—describing increasingly intricate domains.
All of society's knowledge had become scientific, with questions of theology and of metaphysics being unanswerable.
Comte found enumerative induction reliable as a consequence of its grounding in available experience.
He asserted the use of science, rather than metaphysical truth, as the correct method for the improvement of human society.
According to Comte, scientific method frames predictions, confirms them, and states laws—positive statements—irrefutable by theology or by metaphysics .
Regarding experience as justifying enumerative induction by demonstrating the uniformity of nature ,  the British philosopher John Stuart Mill welcomed Comte's positivism, but thought scientific laws susceptible to recall or revision and Mill also withheld from Comte's Religion of Humanity .
Comte was confident in treating scientific law as an irrefutable foundation for all knowledge , and believed that churches, honouring eminent scientists, ought to focus public mindset on altruism —a term Comte coined—to apply science for humankind's social welfare via sociology , Comte's leading science.
During the 1830s and 1840s, while Comte and Mill were the leading philosophers of science, William Whewell found enumerative induction not nearly as convincing, and, despite the dominance of inductivism, formulated "superinduction".
Whewell argued that "the peculiar import of the term Induction " should be recognised: "there is some Conception superinduced upon the facts", that is, "the Invention of a new Conception in every inductive inference".
The creation of Conceptions is easily overlooked and prior to Whewell was rarely recognised.
Whewell explained:  "Although we bind together facts by superinducing upon them a new Conception, this Conception, once introduced and applied, is looked upon as inseparably connected with the facts, and necessarily implied in them.
Having once had the phenomena bound together in their minds in virtue of the Conception, men can no longer easily restore them back to detached and incoherent condition in which they were before they were thus combined."
These "superinduced" explanations may well be flawed, but their accuracy is suggested when they exhibit what Whewell termed consilience —that is, simultaneously predicting the inductive generalizations in multiple areas—a feat that, according to Whewell, can establish their truth.
Perhaps to accommodate the prevailing view of science as inductivist method, Whewell devoted several chapters to "methods of induction" and sometimes used the phrase "logic of induction", despite the fact that induction lacks rules and cannot be trained.
In the 1870s, the originator of pragmatism , C S Peirce performed vast investigations that clarified the basis of deductive inference as a mathematical proof (as, independently, did Gottlob Frege ).
Peirce recognized induction but always insisted on a third type of inference that Peirce variously termed abduction or retroduction or hypothesis or presumption .
Later philosophers termed Peirce's abduction, etc., Inference to the Best Explanation (IBE).
Contemporary philosophy   Bertrand Russell   Having highlighted Hume's problem of induction , John Maynard Keynes posed logical probability as its answer, or as near a solution as he could arrive at.
Bertrand Russell found Keynes's Treatise on Probability the best examination of induction, and believed that if read with Jean Nicod 's Le Probleme logique de l'induction as well as R B Braithwaite 's review of Keynes's work in the October 1925 issue of Mind , that would cover "most of what is known about induction", although the "subject is technical and difficult, involving a good deal of mathematics".
Two decades later, Russell followed Keynes in regarding enumerative induction as an "independent logical principle".
Russell found:  "Hume's skepticism rests entirely upon his rejection of the principle of induction.
The principle of induction, as applied to causation, says that, if A has been found very often accompanied or followed by B , then it is probable that on the next occasion on which A is observed, it will be accompanied or followed by B .
If the principle is to be adequate, a sufficient number of instances must make the probability not far short of certainty.
If this principle, or any other from which it can be deduced, is true, then the casual inferences which Hume rejects are valid, not indeed as giving certainty, but as giving a sufficient probability for practical purposes.
If this principle is not true, every attempt to arrive at general scientific laws from particular observations is fallacious, and Hume's skepticism is inescapable for an empiricist.
The principle itself cannot, of course, without circularity, be inferred from observed uniformities, since it is required to justify any such inference.
It must, therefore, be, or be deduced from, an independent principle not based on experience.
To this extent, Hume has proved that pure empiricism is not a sufficient basis for science.
But if this one principle is admitted, everything else can proceed in accordance with the theory that all our knowledge is based on experience.
It must be granted that this is a serious departure from pure empiricism, and that those who are not empiricists may ask why, if one departure is allowed, others are forbidden.
These, however, are not questions directly raised by Hume's arguments.
What these arguments prove—and I do not think the proof can be controverted—is that induction is an independent logical principle, incapable of being inferred either from experience or from other logical principles, and that without this principle, science is impossible."
Gilbert Harman   In a 1965 paper, Gilbert Harman explained that enumerative induction is not an autonomous phenomenon, but is simply a disguised consequence of Inference to the Best Explanation (IBE).
IBE is otherwise synonymous with C S Peirce 's abduction .
Many philosophers of science espousing scientific realism have maintained that IBE is the way that scientists develop approximately true scientific theories about nature.
Comparison with deductive reasoning   Argument terminology  Inductive reasoning is a form of argument that—in contrast to deductive reasoning—allows for the possibility that a conclusion can be false, even if all of the premises are true.
This difference between deductive and inductive reasoning is reflected in the terminology used to describe deductive and inductive arguments.
In deductive reasoning, an argument is " valid " when, assuming the argument's premises are true, the conclusion must be true.
If the argument is valid and the premises are true, then the argument is "sound" .
In contrast, in inductive reasoning, an argument's premises can never guarantee that the conclusion must be true.
Instead, an argument is "strong" when, assuming the argument's premises are true, the conclusion is probably true.
If the argument is strong and the premises are thought to be true, then the argument is said to be "cogent".
Less formally, the conclusion of an inductive argument may be called "probable", "plausible", "likely", "reasonable", or "justified", but never "certain" or "necessary".
Logic affords no bridge from the probable to the certain.
The futility of attaining certainty through some critical mass of probability can be illustrated with a coin-toss exercise.
Suppose someone tests whether a coin is either a fair one or two-headed.
They flip the coin ten times, and ten times it comes up heads.
At this point, there is a strong reason to believe it is two-headed.
After all, the chance of ten heads in a row is .000976: less than one in one thousand.
Then, after 100 flips, every toss has come up heads.
Now there is “virtual” certainty that the coin is two-headed, and one can regard it as 'true' that the coin is probably two-headed.
Still, one can neither logically nor empirically rule out that the next toss will produce tails.
No matter how many times in a row it comes up heads, this remains the case.
If one programmed a machine to flip a coin over and over continuously, at some point the result would be a string of 100 heads.
In the fullness of time, all combinations will appear.
As for the slim prospect of getting ten out of ten heads from a fair coin—the outcome that made the coin appear biased—many may be surprised to learn that the chance of any sequence of heads or tails is equally unlikely (e.g., H-H-T-T-H-T-H-H-H-T) and yet it occurs in every trial of ten tosses.
That means all results for ten tosses have the same probability as getting ten out of ten heads, which is 0.000976.
If one records the heads-tails sequences, for whatever result, that exact sequence had a chance of 0.000976.
An argument is deductive when the conclusion is necessary given the premises.
That is, the conclusion must be true if the premises are true.
For example, after getting 10 heads in a row one might deduce that the coin had met some statistical criterion to be regarded as 'probably two-sided, a conclusion that would not be falsified even if the next toss yielded 'tails'.
If a deductive conclusion follows duly from its premises, then it is valid; otherwise, it is invalid (that an argument is invalid is not to say its conclusions are false; it may have a true conclusion, just not on account of the premises).
An examination of the following examples will show that the relationship between premises and conclusion is such that the truth of the conclusion is already implicit in the premises.
Bachelors are unmarried because we say they are; we have defined them so.
Socrates is mortal because we have included him in a set of beings that are mortal.
The conclusion for a valid deductive argument is already contained in the premises since its truth is strictly a matter of logical relations.
It cannot say more than its premises.
Inductive premises, on the other hand, draw their substance from fact and evidence, and the conclusion accordingly makes a factual claim or prediction.
Its reliability varies proportionally with the evidence.
Induction wants to reveal something new about the world.
One could say that induction wants to say more than is contained in the premises.
To better see the difference between inductive and deductive arguments, consider that it would not make sense to say: "all rectangles so far examined have four right angles, so the next one I see will have four right angles."
This would treat logical relations as something factual and discoverable, and thus variable and uncertain.
Likewise, speaking deductively we may permissibly say.
"All unicorns can fly; I have a unicorn named Charlie; thus Charlie can fly."
This deductive argument is valid because the logical relations hold; we are not interested in their factual soundness.
The conclusions of inductive reasoning are inherently uncertain .
It only deals with the extent to which, given the premises, the conclusion is credible according to some theory of evidence.
Examples include a many-valued logic , Dempster–Shafer theory , or probability theory with rules for inference such as Bayes' rule .
Unlike deductive reasoning, it does not rely on universals holding over a closed domain of discourse to draw conclusions, so it can be applicable even in cases of epistemic uncertainty (technical issues with this may arise however; for example, the second axiom of probability is a closed-world assumption).
Another crucial difference between these two types of argument is that deductive certainty is impossible in non-axiomatic or empirical systems such as reality , leaving inductive reasoning as the primary route to (probabilistic) knowledge of such systems.
Given that "if A is true then that would cause B , C , and D to be true", an example of deduction would be " A is true therefore we can deduce that B , C , and D are true".
An example of induction would be " B , C , and D are observed to be true therefore A might be true".
A is a reasonable explanation for B , C , and D being true.
For example:  A large enough asteroid impact would create a very large crater and cause a severe impact winter that could drive the non-avian dinosaurs to extinction.
We observe that there is a very large crater in the Gulf of Mexico dating to very near the time of the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs.
Therefore, it is possible that this impact could explain why the non-avian dinosaurs became extinct.
Note, however, that the asteroid explanation for the mass extinction is not necessarily correct.
Other events with the potential to affect global climate also coincide with the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs .
For example, the release of volcanic gases (particularly sulfur dioxide ) during the formation of the Deccan Traps in India .
Another example of an inductive argument:  All biological life forms that we know of depend on liquid water to exist.
Therefore, if we discover a new biological life form, it will probably depend on liquid water to exist.
This argument could have been made every time a new biological life form was found, and would have had a correct conclusion every time; however, it is still possible that in the future a biological life form not requiring liquid water could be discovered.
As a result, the argument may be stated as:  All biological life forms that we know of depend on liquid water to exist.
Therefore, all biological life probably depends on liquid water to exist.
A classical example of an incorrect statistical syllogism was presented by John Vickers:  All of the swans we have seen are white.
Therefore, we know that all swans are white.
The conclusion fails because the population of swans then known was not actually representative of all swans.
A more reasonable conclusion would be: in line with applicable conventions, we might reasonably expect all swans in England to be white, at least in the short-term.
Succinctly put: deduction is about certainty/necessity ; induction is about probability .
Any single assertion will answer to one of these two criteria.
Another approach to the analysis of reasoning is that of modal logic , which deals with the distinction between the necessary and the possible in a way not concerned with probabilities among things deemed possible.
The philosophical definition of inductive reasoning is more nuanced than a simple progression from particular/individual instances to broader generalizations.
Rather, the premises of an inductive logical argument indicate some degree of support (inductive probability) for the conclusion but do not entail it; that is, they suggest truth but do not ensure it.
In this manner, there is the possibility of moving from general statements to individual instances (for example, statistical syllogisms).
Note that the definition of inductive reasoning described here differs from mathematical induction , which, in fact, is a form of deductive reasoning.
Mathematical induction is used to provide strict proofs of the properties of recursively defined sets.
The deductive nature of mathematical induction derives from its basis in a non-finite number of cases, in contrast with the finite number of cases involved in an enumerative induction procedure like proof by exhaustion .
Both mathematical induction and proof by exhaustion are examples of complete induction .
Complete induction is a masked type of deductive reasoning.
Problem of induction   Main article: The problem of induction  Although philosophers at least as far back as the Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus have pointed out the unsoundness of inductive reasoning,  the classic philosophical critique of the problem of induction was given by the Scottish philosopher David Hume .
Although the use of inductive reasoning demonstrates considerable success, the justification for its application has been questionable.
Recognizing this, Hume highlighted the fact that our mind often draws conclusions from relatively limited experiences that appear correct but which are actually far from certain.
In deduction, the truth value of the conclusion is based on the truth of the premise.
In induction, however, the dependence of the conclusion on the premise is always uncertain.
For example, let us assume that all ravens are black.
The fact that there are numerous black ravens supports the assumption.
Our assumption, however, becomes invalid once it is discovered that there are white ravens.
Therefore, the general rule "all ravens are black" is not the kind of statement that can ever be certain.
Hume further argued that it is impossible to justify inductive reasoning: this is because it cannot be justified deductively, so our only option is to justify it inductively.
Since this argument is circular, with the help of Hume's fork he concluded that our use of induction is not logically justifiable .
Hume nevertheless stated that even if induction were proved unreliable, we would still have to rely on it.
So instead of a position of severe skepticism , Hume advocated a practical skepticism based on common sense , where the inevitability of induction is accepted.
Bertrand Russell illustrated Hume's skepticism in a story about a chicken who, fed every morning without fail and following the laws of induction, concluded that this feeding would always continue, until his throat was eventually cut by the farmer.
In 1963, Karl Popper wrote, "Induction, i.e.
inference based on many observations, is a myth.
It is neither a psychological fact, nor a fact of ordinary life, nor one of scientific procedure."
Popper's 1972 book Objective Knowledge —whose first chapter is devoted to the problem of induction—opens, "I think I have solved a major philosophical problem: the problem of induction ".
In Popper's schema, enumerative induction is "a kind of optical illusion" cast by the steps of conjecture and refutation during a problem shift .
An imaginative leap, the tentative solution is improvised, lacking inductive rules to guide it.
The resulting, unrestricted generalization is deductive, an entailed consequence of all explanatory considerations.
Controversy continued, however, with Popper's putative solution not generally accepted.
Donald A.
Gillies argues that rules of inferences related to inductive reasoning are overwhelmingly absent from science, and describes most scientific inferences as "involv conjectures thought up by human ingenuity and creativity, and by no means inferred in any mechanical fashion, or according to precisely specified rules."
Gillies also provides a rare counterexample "in the machine learning programs of AI ."
Biases   Inductive reasoning is also known as hypothesis construction because any conclusions made are based on current knowledge and predictions.
As with deductive arguments, biases can distort the proper application of inductive argument, thereby preventing the reasoner from forming the most logical conclusion based on the clues.
Examples of these biases include the availability heuristic , confirmation bias , and the predictable-world bias .
The availability heuristic is regarded as causing the reasoner to depend primarily upon information that is readily available.
People have a tendency to rely on information that is easily accessible in the world around them.
For example, in surveys, when people are asked to estimate the percentage of people who died from various causes, most respondents choose the causes that have been most prevalent in the media such as terrorism, murders, and airplane accidents, rather than causes such as disease and traffic accidents, which have been technically "less accessible" to the individual since they are not emphasized as heavily in the world around them.
Confirmation bias is based on the natural tendency to confirm rather than deny a hypothesis.
Research has demonstrated that people are inclined to seek solutions to problems that are more consistent with known hypotheses rather than attempt to refute those hypotheses.
Often, in experiments, subjects will ask questions that seek answers that fit established hypotheses, thus confirming these hypotheses.
For example, if it is hypothesized that Sally is a sociable individual, subjects will naturally seek to confirm the premise by asking questions that would produce answers confirming that Sally is, in fact, a sociable individual.
The predictable-world bias revolves around the inclination to perceive order where it has not been proved to exist, either at all or at a particular level of abstraction.
Gambling, for example, is one of the most popular examples of predictable-world bias.
Gamblers often begin to think that they see simple and obvious patterns in the outcomes and therefore believe that they are able to predict outcomes based on what they have witnessed.
In reality, however, the outcomes of these games are difficult to predict and highly complex in nature.
In general, people tend to seek some type of simplistic order to explain or justify their beliefs and experiences, and it is often difficult for them to realise that their perceptions of order may be entirely different from the truth.
Bayesian inference   As a logic of induction rather than a theory of belief, Bayesian inference does not determine which beliefs are a priori rational, but rather determines how we should rationally change the beliefs we have when presented with evidence.
We begin by considering an exhaustive list of possibilities, a definite probabilistic characterisation of each of them (in terms of likelihoods) and precise prior probabilities for them (e.g.
based on logic or induction from previous experience) and, when faced with evidence, we adjust the strength of our belief in the given hypotheses in a precise manner using Bayesian logic to yield candidate 'a posteriori probabilities', taking no account of the extent to which the new evidence may happen to give us specific reasons to doubt our assumptions.
Otherwise it is advisable to review and repeat as necessary the consideration of possibilities and their characterisation until, perhaps, a stable situation is reached.
Inductive inference   Around 1960, Ray Solomonoff founded the theory of universal inductive inference , a theory of prediction based on observations, for example, predicting the next symbol based upon a given series of symbols.
This is a formal inductive framework that combines algorithmic information theory with the Bayesian framework.
Universal inductive inference is based on solid philosophical foundations and 'seems to be an inadequate tool for dealing with any reasonably complex or real-world environment',  and can be considered as a mathematically formalized Occam's razor .
Fundamental ingredients of the theory are the concepts of algorithmic probability and Kolmogorov complexity .
Proposition in mathematics that is unproven  For text reconstruction, see Conjecture (textual criticism) .
The real part (red) and imaginary part (blue) of the Riemann zeta function along the critical line Re( s ) = 1/2.
The first non-trivial zeros can be seen at Im( s ) = ±14.135, ±21.022 and ±25.011.
The Riemann hypothesis , a famous conjecture, says that all non-trivial zeros of the zeta function lie along the critical line.
In mathematics , a conjecture is a conclusion or a proposition that is proffered on a tentative basis without proof .
Some conjectures, such as the Riemann hypothesis (still a conjecture) or Fermat's Last Theorem (a conjecture until proven in 1995 by Andrew Wiles ), have shaped much of mathematical history as new areas of mathematics are developed in order to prove them.
Resolution of conjectures   Proof   Formal mathematics is based on provable truth.
In mathematics, any number of cases supporting a universally quantified conjecture, no matter how large, is insufficient for establishing the conjecture's veracity, since a single counterexample could immediately bring down the conjecture.
Mathematical journals sometimes publish the minor results of research teams having extended the search for a counterexample farther than previously done.
For instance, the Collatz conjecture , which concerns whether or not certain sequences of integers terminate, has been tested for all integers up to 1.2 × 10 12 (over a trillion).
However, the failure to find a counterexample after extensive search does not constitute a proof that the conjecture is true—because the conjecture might be false but with a very large minimal counterexample.
Nevertheless, mathematicians often regard a conjecture as strongly supported by evidence even though not yet proved.
That evidence may be of various kinds, such as verification of consequences of it or strong interconnections with known results.
A conjecture is considered proven only when it has been shown that it is logically impossible for it to be false.
There are various methods of doing so; see methods of mathematical proof for more details.
One method of proof, applicable when there are only a finite number of cases that could lead to counterexamples, is known as " brute force ": in this approach, all possible cases are considered and shown not to give counterexamples.
In some occasions, the number of cases is quite large, in which case a brute-force proof may require as a practical matter the use of a computer algorithm to check all the cases.
For example, the validity of the 1976 and 1997 brute-force proofs of the four color theorem by computer was initially doubted, but was eventually confirmed in 2005 by theorem-proving software.
When a conjecture has been proven , it is no longer a conjecture but a theorem .
Many important theorems were once conjectures, such as the Geometrization theorem (which resolved the Poincaré conjecture ), Fermat's Last Theorem , and others.
Disproof   Conjectures disproven through counterexample are sometimes referred to as false conjectures (cf.
the Pólya conjecture and Euler's sum of powers conjecture ).
In the case of the latter, the first counterexample found for the n=4 case involved numbers in the millions, although it has been subsequently found that the minimal counterexample is actually smaller.
Independent conjectures   Not every conjecture ends up being proven true or false.
The continuum hypothesis , which tries to ascertain the relative cardinality of certain infinite sets , was eventually shown to be independent from the generally accepted set of Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms of set theory.
It is therefore possible to adopt this statement, or its negation, as a new axiom in a consistent manner (much as Euclid 's parallel postulate can be taken either as true or false in an axiomatic system for geometry).
In this case, if a proof uses this statement, researchers will often look for a new proof that doesn't require the hypothesis (in the same way that it is desirable that statements in Euclidean geometry be proved using only the axioms of neutral geometry, i.e.
without the parallel postulate).
The one major exception to this in practice is the axiom of choice , as the majority of researchers usually do not worry whether a result requires it—unless they are studying this axiom in particular.
Conditional proofs   Sometimes, a conjecture is called a hypothesis when it is used frequently and repeatedly as an assumption in proofs of other results.
For example, the Riemann hypothesis is a conjecture from number theory that — amongst other things — makes predictions about the distribution of prime numbers .
Few number theorists doubt that the Riemann hypothesis is true.
In fact, in anticipation of its eventual proof, some have even proceeded to develop further proofs which are contingent on the truth of this conjecture.
These are called conditional proofs : the conjectures assumed appear in the hypotheses of the theorem, for the time being.
These "proofs", however, would fall apart if it turned out that the hypothesis was false, so there is considerable interest in verifying the truth or falsity of conjectures of this type.
Important examples   Fermat's Last Theorem   Main article: Fermat's Last Theorem  In number theory , Fermat's Last Theorem (sometimes called Fermat's conjecture , especially in older texts) states that no three positive  integers      a    {\displaystyle a}   ,     b    {\displaystyle b}   , and     c    {\displaystyle c}   can satisfy the equation      a   n    +   b   n    =   c   n      {\displaystyle a^{n}+b^{n}=c^{n}}   for any integer value of     n    {\displaystyle n}   greater than two.
This theorem was first conjectured by Pierre de Fermat in 1637 in the margin of a copy of Arithmetica , where he claimed that he had a proof that was too large to fit in the margin.
The first successful proof was released in 1994 by Andrew Wiles , and formally published in 1995, after 358 years of effort by mathematicians.
The unsolved problem stimulated the development of algebraic number theory in the 19th century, and the proof of the modularity theorem in the 20th century.
It is among the most notable theorems in the history of mathematics , and prior to its proof it was in the Guinness Book of World Records for "most difficult mathematical problems".
Four color theorem   Main article: Four color theorem  A four-coloring of a map of the states of the United States (ignoring lakes).
In mathematics , the four color theorem , or the four color map theorem, states that given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions, producing a figure called a map , no more than four colors are required to color the regions of the map—so that no two adjacent regions have the same color.
Two regions are called adjacent if they share a common boundary that is not a corner, where corners are the points shared by three or more regions.
For example, in the map of the United States of America, Utah and Arizona are adjacent, but Utah and New Mexico, which only share a point that also belongs to Arizona and Colorado, are not.
Möbius mentioned the problem in his lectures as early as 1840.
The conjecture was first proposed on October 23, 1852  when Francis Guthrie , while trying to color the map of counties of England, noticed that only four different colors were needed.
The five color theorem , which has a short elementary proof, states that five colors suffice to color a map and was proven in the late 19th century;  however, proving that four colors suffice turned out to be significantly harder.
A number of false proofs and false counterexamples have appeared since the first statement of the four color theorem in 1852.
The four color theorem was ultimately proven in 1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken .
It was the first major theorem to be proved using a computer .
Appel and Haken's approach started by showing that there is a particular set of 1,936 maps, each of which cannot be part of a smallest-sized counterexample to the four color theorem (i.e., if they did appear, one could make a smaller counter-example).
Appel and Haken used a special-purpose computer program to confirm that each of these maps had this property.
Additionally, any map that could potentially be a counterexample must have a portion that looks like one of these 1,936 maps.
Showing this with hundreds of pages of hand analysis, Appel and Haken concluded that no smallest counterexample exists because any must contain, yet do not contain, one of these 1,936 maps.
This contradiction means there are no counterexamples at all and that the theorem is therefore true.
Initially, their proof was not accepted by mathematicians at all because the computer-assisted proof was infeasible for a human to check by hand.
However, the proof has since then gained wider acceptance, although doubts still remain.
Hauptvermutung   Main article: Hauptvermutung  The Hauptvermutung (German for main conjecture) of geometric topology is the conjecture that any two triangulations of a triangulable space have a common refinement, a single triangulation that is a subdivision of both of them.
It was originally formulated in 1908, by Steinitz and Tietze .
This conjecture is now known to be false.
The non-manifold version was disproved by John Milnor  in 1961 using Reidemeister torsion .
The manifold version is true in dimensions  m ≤ 3 .
The cases m = 2 and 3 were proved by Tibor Radó and Edwin E.
Moise  in the 1920s and 1950s, respectively.
Weil conjectures   Main article: Weil conjectures  In mathematics , the Weil conjectures were some highly influential proposals by André Weil ( 1949 ) on the generating functions (known as local zeta-functions ) derived from counting the number of points on algebraic varieties over finite fields .
A variety V over a finite field with q elements has a finite number of rational points , as well as points over every finite field with q k elements containing that field.
The generating function has coefficients derived from the numbers N k of points over the (essentially unique) field with q k elements.
Weil conjectured that such zeta-functions should be rational functions , should satisfy a form of functional equation , and should have their zeroes in restricted places.
The last two parts were quite consciously modeled on the Riemann zeta function and Riemann hypothesis .
The rationality was proved by Dwork (1960) , the functional equation by Grothendieck (1965) , and the analogue of the Riemann hypothesis was  proved by Deligne (1974) .
Poincaré conjecture   Main article: Poincaré conjecture In mathematics , the Poincaré conjecture is a theorem about the characterization of the 3-sphere , which is the hypersphere that bounds the unit ball in four-dimensional space.
The conjecture states that: Every simply connected , closed 3- manifold is homeomorphic to the 3-sphere.
An equivalent form of the conjecture involves a coarser form of equivalence than homeomorphism called homotopy equivalence : if a 3-manifold is homotopy equivalent to the 3-sphere, then it is necessarily homeomorphic to it.
Originally conjectured by Henri Poincaré in 1904, the theorem concerns a space that locally looks like ordinary three-dimensional space but is connected, finite in size, and lacks any boundary (a closed  3-manifold ).
The Poincaré conjecture claims that if such a space has the additional property that each loop in the space can be continuously tightened to a point, then it is necessarily a three-dimensional sphere.
An analogous result has been known in higher dimensions for some time.
After nearly a century of effort by mathematicians, Grigori Perelman presented a proof of the conjecture in three papers made available in 2002 and 2003 on arXiv .
The proof followed on from the program of Richard S.
Hamilton to use the Ricci flow to attempt to solve the problem.
Hamilton later introduced a modification of the standard Ricci flow, called Ricci flow with surgery to systematically excise singular regions as they develop, in a controlled way, but was unable to prove this method "converged" in three dimensions.
Perelman completed this portion of the proof.
Several teams of mathematicians have verified that Perelman's proof is correct.
The Poincaré conjecture, before being proven, was one of the most important open questions in topology .
Riemann hypothesis   Main article: Riemann hypothesis  In mathematics, the Riemann hypothesis , proposed by Bernhard Riemann ( 1859 ), is a conjecture that the non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function all have real part 1/2.
The name is also used for some closely related analogues, such as the Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields .
The Riemann hypothesis implies results about the distribution of prime numbers .
Along with suitable generalizations, some mathematicians consider it the most important unresolved problem in pure mathematics .
The Riemann hypothesis, along with the Goldbach conjecture , is part of Hilbert's eighth problem in David Hilbert 's list of 23 unsolved problems ; it is also one of the Clay Mathematics Institute  Millennium Prize Problems .
P versus NP problem   Main article: P versus NP problem  The P versus NP problem is a major unsolved problem in computer science .
Informally, it asks whether every problem whose solution can be quickly verified by a computer can also be quickly solved by a computer; it is widely conjectured that the answer is no.
It was essentially first mentioned in a 1956 letter written by Kurt Gödel to John von Neumann .
Gödel asked whether a certain NP-complete problem could be solved in quadratic or linear time.
The precise statement of the P=NP problem was introduced in 1971 by Stephen Cook in his seminal paper "The complexity of theorem proving procedures"  and is considered by many to be the most important open problem in the field.
It is one of the seven Millennium Prize Problems selected by the Clay Mathematics Institute to carry a US$1,000,000 prize for the first correct solution.
Other conjectures   Goldbach's conjecture  The twin prime conjecture  The Collatz conjecture  The Manin conjecture  The Maldacena conjecture  The Euler conjecture , proposed by Euler in the 18th century but for which counterexamples for a number of exponents (starting with n=4) were found beginning in the mid 20th century  The Hardy-Littlewood conjectures are a pair of conjectures concerning the distribution of prime numbers, the first of which expands upon the aforementioned twin prime conjecture.
Neither one has either been proven or disproven, but it has been proven that both cannot simultaneously be true (i.e., at least one must be false).
It has not been proven which one is false, but it is widely believed that the first conjecture is true and the second one is false.
The Langlands program  is a far-reaching web of these ideas of ' unifying conjectures ' that link different subfields of mathematics (e.g.
between number theory and representation theory of Lie groups ).
Some of these conjectures have since been proved.
In other sciences   Karl Popper pioneered the use of the term "conjecture" in scientific philosophy .
Conjecture is related to hypothesis , which in science refers to a testable conjecture.
Language as naturally spoken by humans  This article is about languages naturally arising in human society.
For natural language in computer systems, see Natural language processing .
For the theory of inborn linguistic ability, see Universal grammar .
Neuropsychology  Topics  Brain regions  Clinical neuropsychology  Cognitive neuropsychology  Cognitive neuroscience  Dementia  Human brain  Neuroanatomy  Neurophysiology  Neuropsychological assessment  Neuropsychological rehabilitation  Traumatic brain injury   Brain functions  Arousal  Attention  Consciousness  Decision making  Executive functions  Natural language  Learning  Memory  Motor coordination  Perception  Planning  Problem solving  Thought   People  Alan Baddeley  Arthur L.
Benton  David Bohm  Antonio Damasio  Phineas Gage  Norman Geschwind  Elkhonon Goldberg  Patricia Goldman-Rakic  Donald O.
Hebb  Kenneth Heilman  Eric Kandel  Edith Kaplan  Muriel Lezak  Benjamin Libet  Rodolfo Llinás  Alexander Luria  Brenda Milner  Karl H.
Pribram  Pasko Rakic  Oliver Sacks  Mark Rosenzweig  Roger W.
Sperry  Hans-Lukas Teuber  Henry Molaison ("H.M.", patient)  K.C.
(patient)   Tests  Benton Visual Retention Test  Continuous Performance Task  Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery  Hayling and Brixton tests  Lexical Decision Task  Luria-Nebraska neuropsychological battery  Mini–mental state examination  Rey–Osterrieth complex figure  Stroop Test  Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale  Wechsler Memory Scale  Wisconsin Card Sorting Task     Psychology portal   Philosophy portal   Medicine portal  v t e  In neuropsychology , linguistics , and philosophy of language , a natural language or ordinary language is any language that occurs naturally in a human community by a process of use, repetition, and change without conscious planning or premeditation.
It can take different forms, namely either a spoken language or a sign language .
Natural languages are distinguished from constructed and formal languages such as those used to program computers or to study logic .
Defining natural language   Natural language can be broadly defined as different from  artificial and constructed languages , e.g.
computer programming languages  constructed international auxiliary languages  non-human communication systems in nature such as whale and other marine mammal vocalizations or honey bees ' waggle dance .
All varieties of world languages are natural languages, including those that are associated with linguistic prescriptivism or language regulation .
( Nonstandard dialects can be viewed as a wild type in comparison with standard languages .)
An official language with a regulating academy such as Standard French , overseen by the Académie Française , is classified as a natural language (e.g.
in the field of natural language processing ), as its prescriptive aspects do not make it constructed enough to be a constructed language or controlled enough to be a controlled natural language .
Controlled languages   Main article: Controlled natural language  Controlled natural languages are subsets of natural languages whose grammars and dictionaries have been restricted in order to reduce ambiguity and complexity.
This may be accomplished by decreasing usage of superlative or adverbial forms, or irregular verbs .
Typical purposes for developing and implementing a controlled natural language are to aid understanding by non-native speakers or to ease computer processing.
An example of a widely-used controlled natural language is Simplified Technical English , which was originally developed for aerospace and avionics industry manuals.
International constructed languages   Main article: International auxiliary language  Being constructed, International auxiliary languages such as Esperanto and Interlingua are not considered natural languages, with the possible exception of true native speakers of such languages.
Natural languages evolve, through fluctuations in vocabulary and syntax, to incrementally improve human communication.
In contrast, Esperanto was created by Polish ophthalmologist L.
L.
Zamenhof in the late 19th century.
Some natural languages have become organically "standardized" through the synthesis of two or more pre-existing natural languages over a relatively short period of time through the development of a pidgin , which is not considered a language, into a stable creole language .
A creole such as Haitian Creole has its own grammar, vocabulary and literature.
It is spoken by over 10 million people worldwide and is one of the two official languages of the Republic of Haiti .
As of 1996, there were 350 attested families with one or more native speakers of Esperanto .
Latino sine flexione , another international auxiliary language, is no longer widely spoken.
Adhering absolutely to certain constraints with consistency  For the medical term, see Rigor (medicine) .
For the sign of death, see Rigor mortis .
This article has multiple issues.
Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .
( Learn how and when to remove these template messages )   This article needs additional citations for verification .
Find sources:  "Rigour" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  This article possibly contains original research .
Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations .
Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.
( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )   ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )       Look up rigour in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Rigour ( British English ) or rigor ( American English ; see spelling differences ) describes a condition of stiffness or strictness.
These constraints may be environmentally imposed, such as "the rigours of famine "; logically imposed, such as mathematical proofs which must maintain consistent answers; or socially imposed, such as the process of defining ethics and law .
Etymology   "Rigour" comes to English through old French (13th c., Modern French  rigueur ) meaning "stiffness", which itself is based on the Latin  rigorem (nominative rigor ) "numbness, stiffness, hardness, firmness; roughness, rudeness", from the verb  rigere "to be stiff".
The noun was frequently used to describe a condition of strictness or stiffness, which arises from a situation or constraint either chosen or experienced passively.
For example, the title of the book Theologia Moralis Inter Rigorem et Laxitatem Medi roughly translates as "mediating theological morality between rigour and laxness".
The book details, for the clergy , situations in which they are obligated to follow church law exactly, and in which situations they can be more forgiving yet still considered moral.
Rigor mortis translates directly as the stiffness ( rigor ) of death ( mortis ), again describing a condition which arises from a certain constraint (death).
Intellectualism   Intellectual rigour is a process of thought which is consistent, does not contain self-contradiction, and takes into account the entire scope of available knowledge on the topic.
It actively avoids logical fallacy .
Furthermore, it requires a sceptical assessment of the available knowledge.
If a topic or case is dealt with in a rigorous way, it typically means that it is dealt with in a comprehensive, thorough and complete way, leaving no room for inconsistencies.
Scholarly method describes the different approaches or methods which may be taken to apply intellectual rigour on an institutional level to ensure the quality of information published.
An example of intellectual rigour assisted by a methodical approach is the scientific method , in which a person will produce a hypothesis based on what they believe to be true, then construct experiments in order to prove that hypothesis wrong.
This method, when followed correctly, helps to prevent against circular reasoning and other fallacies which frequently plague conclusions within academia.
Other disciplines, such as philosophy and mathematics, employ their own structures to ensure intellectual rigour.
Each method requires close attention to criteria for logical consistency, as well as to all relevant evidence and possible differences of interpretation.
At an institutional level, peer review is used to validate intellectual rigour.
Honesty   Intellectual rigour is a subset of intellectual honesty —a practice of thought in which ones convictions are kept in proportion to valid  evidence .
Intellectual honesty is an unbiased approach to the acquisition, analysis, and transmission of ideas.
A person is being intellectually honest when he or she, knowing the truth, states that truth, regardless of outside social/environmental pressures.
It is possible to doubt whether complete intellectual honesty exists—on the grounds that no one can entirely master his or her own presuppositions—without doubting that certain kinds of intellectual rigour are potentially available.
The distinction certainly matters greatly in debate , if one wishes to say that an argument is flawed in its premises .
Politics and law   Main article: Letter and spirit of the law  The setting for intellectual rigour does tend to assume a principled position from which to advance or argue.
An opportunistic tendency to use any argument at hand is not very rigorous, although very common in politics , for example.
Arguing one way one day, and another later, can be defended by casuistry , i.e.
by saying the cases are different.
In the legal context, for practical purposes, the facts of cases do always differ.
Case law can therefore be at odds with a principled approach; and intellectual rigour can seem to be defeated.
This defines a judge 's problem with uncodified law .
Codified law poses a different problem, of interpretation and adaptation of definite principles without losing the point; here applying the letter of the law, with all due rigour, may on occasion seem to undermine the principled approach .
Mathematics   Mathematical rigour can apply to methods of mathematical proof and to  methods of mathematical practice (thus relating to other interpretations of rigour).
Mathematical proof   Main article: Mathematical proof  See also: Hyperbolic geometry § Philosophical consequences   Mathematical rigour is often cited as a kind of gold standard for mathematical proof .
Its history traces back to Greek mathematics , especially to Euclid 's Elements .
Until the 19th century, Euclid's Elements was seen as extremely rigorous and profound, but in the late 19th century, Hilbert (among others) realized that the work left certain assumptions implicit—assumptions that could not be proved from Euclid's Axioms (e.g.
two circles can intersect in a point, some point is within an angle, and figures can be superimposed on each other).
This was contrary to the idea of rigorous proof where all assumptions need to be stated and nothing can be left implicit.
New foundations were developed using the axiomatic method to address this gap in rigour found in the Elements (e.g., Hilbert's axioms , Birkhoff's axioms , Tarski's axioms ).
During the 19th century, the term "rigorous" began to be used to describe increasing levels of abstraction when dealing with calculus which eventually became known as mathematical analysis .
The works of Cauchy added rigour to the older works of Euler and Gauss .
The works of Riemann added rigour to the works of Cauchy.
The works of Weierstrass added rigour to the works of Riemann, eventually culminating in the arithmetization of analysis .
Starting in the 1870s, the term gradually came to be associated with Cantorian  set theory .
Mathematical rigour can be modelled as amenability to algorithmic proof checking .
Indeed, with the aid of computers, it is possible to check some proofs mechanically.
Formal rigour is the introduction of high degrees of completeness by means of a formal language where such proofs can be codified using set theories such as ZFC (see automated theorem proving ).
Published mathematical arguments have to conform to a standard of rigour, but are written in a mixture of symbolic and natural language.
In this sense, written mathematical discourse is a prototype of formal proof.
Often, a written proof is accepted as rigorous although it might not be formalised as yet.
The reason often cited by mathematicians for writing informally is that completely formal proofs tend to be longer and more unwieldy, thereby obscuring the line of argument.
An argument that appears obvious to human intuition may in fact require fairly long formal derivations from the axioms.
A particularly well-known example is how in Principia Mathematica , Whitehead and Russell have to expend a number of lines of rather opaque effort in order to establish that, indeed, it is sensical to say: "1+1=2".
In short, comprehensibility is favoured over formality in written discourse.
Still, advocates of automated theorem provers may argue that the formalisation of proof does improve the mathematical rigour by disclosing gaps or flaws in informal written discourse.
When the correctness of a proof is disputed, formalisation is a way to settle such a dispute as it helps to reduce misinterpretations or ambiguity.
Physics   The role of mathematical rigour in relation to physics is twofold:  First, there is the general question, sometimes called Wigner's Puzzle ,  "how it is that mathematics, quite generally, is applicable to nature?"
Some scientists believe that its record of successful application to nature justifies the study of mathematical physics .
Second, there is the question regarding the role and status of mathematically rigorous results and relations.
This question is particularly vexing in relation to quantum field theory , where computations often produce infinite values for which a variety of non-rigorous work-arounds have been devised.
Both aspects of mathematical rigour in physics have attracted considerable attention in philosophy of science (see, for example, ref.
and ref.
and the works quoted therein).
Education   Rigour in the classroom is a hotly debated topic amongst educators.
Generally speaking, classroom rigour consists of multi-faceted, challenging instruction and correct placement of the student.
Students excelling in formal operational thought tend to excel in classes for gifted students.
Students who have not reached that final stage of cognitive development , according to developmental psychologist Jean Piaget , can build upon those skills with the help of a properly trained teacher.
Rigour in the classroom is commonly called "rigorous instruction".
It is instruction that requires students to construct meaning for themselves, impose structure on information, integrate individual skills into processes, operate within but at the outer edge of their abilities, and apply what they learn in more than one context and to unpredictable situations   Branch of logic  For the journal, see Informal Logic (journal) .
Argument terminology used in logic  Informal logic encompasses the principles of logic and logical thought outside of a formal setting (characterized by the usage of particular statements ).
However, the precise definition of "informal logic" is a matter of some dispute.
Ralph H.
Johnson and J.
Anthony Blair define informal logic as "a branch of logic whose task is to develop non-formal standards, criteria, procedures for the analysis, interpretation, evaluation, criticism and construction of argumentation."
This definition reflects what had been implicit in their practice and what others were doing in their informal logic texts.
Informal logic is associated with informal fallacies , critical thinking , the thinking skills movement  and the interdisciplinary inquiry known as argumentation theory .
Frans H.
van Eemeren writes that the label "informal logic" covers a "collection of normative approaches to the study of reasoning in ordinary language that remain closer to the practice of argumentation than formal logic."
History   This section may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies .
Please help improve it by rewriting it in a balanced fashion that contextualizes different points of view.
( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Informal logic as a distinguished enterprise under this name emerged roughly in the late 1970s as a sub-field of philosophy .
The naming of the field was preceded by the appearance of a number of textbooks that rejected the symbolic approach to logic on pedagogical grounds as inappropriate and unhelpful for introductory textbooks on logic for a general audience, for example Howard Kahane 's Logic and Contemporary Rhetoric , subtitled "The Use of Reason in Everyday Life", first published in 1971.
Kahane's textbook was described on the notice of his death in the Proceedings And Addresses of the American Philosophical Association (2002) as "a text in informal logic,  was intended to enable students to cope with the misleading rhetoric one frequently finds in the media and in political discourse.
It was organized around a discussion of fallacies, and was meant to be a practical instrument for dealing with the problems of everyday life.
...
gone through many editions;  ...
still in print; and the thousands upon thousands of students who have taken courses in which his text  ...
used can thank Howard for contributing to their ability to dissect arguments and avoid the deceptions of deceitful rhetoric.
He tried to put into practice the ideal of discourse that aims at truth rather than merely at persuasion.
(Hausman et al.
2002)"   Other textbooks from the era taking this approach were Michael Scriven 's Reasoning (Edgepress, 1976) and Logical Self-Defense by Ralph Johnson and J.
Anthony Blair , first published in 1977.
Earlier precursors in this tradition can be considered Monroe Beardsley 's Practical Logic (1950) and Stephen Toulmin 's The Uses of Argument (1958).
The field perhaps became recognized under its current name with the First International Symposium on Informal Logic held in 1978.
Although initially motivated by a new pedagogical approach to undergraduate logic textbooks, the scope of the field was basically defined by a list of 13 problems and issues which Blair and Johnson included as an appendix to their keynote address at this symposium:     the theory of logical criticism  the theory of argument  the theory of fallacy  the fallacy approach vs.
the critical thinking approach  the viability of the inductive/deductive dichotomy  the ethics of argumentation and logical criticism  the problem of assumptions and missing premises  the problem of context  methods of extracting arguments from context  methods of displaying arguments  the problem of pedagogy  the nature, division and scope of informal logic  the relationship of informal logic to other inquiries  David Hitchcock argues that the naming of the field was unfortunate, and that philosophy of argument would have been more appropriate.
He argues that more undergraduate students in North America study informal logic than any other branch of philosophy, but that as of 2003 informal logic (or philosophy of argument) was not recognized as separate sub-field by the World Congress of Philosophy .
Frans H.
van Eemeren wrote that "informal logic" is mainly an approach to argumentation advanced by a group of US and Canadian philosophers and largely based on the previous works of Stephen Toulmin and to a lesser extent those of Chaïm Perelman .
Alongside the symposia, since 1983 the journal Informal Logic has been the publication of record of the field, with Blair and Johnson as initial editors, with the editorial board now including two other colleagues from the University of Windsor — Christopher Tindale and Hans V.
Hansen.
Other journals that regularly publish articles on informal logic include Argumentation (founded in 1986), Philosophy and Rhetoric , Argumentation and Advocacy (the journal of the American Forensic Association ), and Inquiry: Critical Thinking Across the Disciplines (founded in 1988).
Proposed definitions   Johnson and Blair (2000) proposed the following definition: "Informal logic designates that branch of logic whose task is to develop non-formal 2 standards, criteria, procedures for the analysis, interpretation, evaluation, critique and construction of argumentation in everyday discourse."
Their meaning of non-formal 2 is taken from Barth and Krabbe (1982), which is explained below.
To understand the definition above, one must understand informal which takes its meaning in contrast to its counterpart formal.
(This point was not made for a very long time, hence the nature of informal logic remained opaque, even to those involved in it, for a period of time.)
Here it is helpful to have recourse  to Barth and Krabbe (1982:14f) where they distinguish three senses of the term form.
By form 1 , Barth and Krabbe mean the sense of the term which derives from the Platonic  idea of form —the ultimate metaphysical unit.
Barth and Krabbe claim that most traditional logic is formal in this sense.
That is, syllogistic logic is a logic of terms where the terms could naturally be understood as place-holders for Platonic (or Aristotelian ) forms.
In this first sense of form , almost all logic is informal (not-formal).
Understanding informal logic this way would be much too broad to be useful.
By form 2 , Barth and Krabbe mean the form of sentences and statements as these are understood in modern systems of logic.
Here validity is the focus: if the premises are true, the conclusion must then also be true.
Now validity has to do with the logical form of the statement that makes up the argument.
In this sense of formal , most modern and contemporary logic is formal .
That is, such logics canonize the notion of logical form, and the notion of validity plays the central normative role.
In this second sense of form, informal logic is not-formal, because it abandons the notion of logical form as the key to understanding the structure of arguments, and likewise retires validity as normative for the purposes of the evaluation of argument.
It seems to many that validity is too stringent a requirement, that there are good arguments in which the conclusion is supported by the premises even though it does not follow necessarily from them (as validity requires).
An argument in which the conclusion is thought to be "beyond reasonable doubt, given the premises" is sufficient in law to cause a person to be sentenced to death , even though it does not meet the standard of logical validity.
This type of argument, based on accumulation of evidence rather than pure deduction , is called a conductive argument.
By form 3 , Barth and Krabbe mean to refer to "procedures which are somehow regulated or regimented, which take place according to some set of rules."
Barth and Krabbe say that "we do not defend formality 3 of all kinds and under all circumstances."
Rather "we defend the thesis that verbal dialectics must have a certain form (i.e., must proceed according to certain rules) in order that one can speak of the discussion as being won or lost" (19).
In this third sense of form , informal logic can be formal, for there is nothing in the informal logic enterprise that stands opposed to the idea that argumentative discourse should be subject to norms, i.e., subject to rules, criteria, standards or procedures.
Informal logic does present standards for the evaluation of argument, procedures for detecting missing premises etc.
Johnson and Blair (2000) noticed a limitation of their own definition, particularly with respect to "everyday discourse", which could indicate that it does not seek to understand specialized, domain-specific arguments made in natural languages.
Consequently, they have argued that the crucial divide is between arguments made in formal languages and those made in natural languages .
Fisher and Scriven (1997) proposed a more encompassing definition, seeing informal logic as "the discipline which studies the practice of critical thinking and provides its intellectual spine".
By "critical thinking" they understand "skilled and active interpretation and evaluation of observations and communications, information and argumentation."
Criticisms   Some hold the view that informal logic is not a branch or subdiscipline of logic, or even the view that there cannot be such a thing as informal logic.
Massey criticizes informal logic on the grounds that it has no theory underpinning it.
Informal logic, he says, requires detailed classification schemes to organize it, which in other disciplines is provided by the underlying theory.
He maintains that there is no method of establishing the invalidity of an argument aside from the formal method, and that the study of fallacies may be of more interest to other disciplines, like psychology , than to philosophy and logic.
Relation to critical thinking   See also: Critical thinking  Since the 1980s, informal logic has been partnered and even equated,  in the minds of many, with critical thinking.
The precise definition of critical thinking is a subject of much dispute.
Critical thinking, as defined by Johnson, is the evaluation of an intellectual product (an argument, an explanation, a theory) in terms of its strengths and weaknesses.
While critical thinking will include evaluation of arguments and hence require skills of argumentation including informal logic, critical thinking requires additional abilities not supplied by informal logic, such as the ability to obtain and assess information and to clarify meaning.
Also, many believe that critical thinking requires certain dispositions.
Understood in this way, critical thinking is a broad term for the attitudes and skills that are involved in analyzing and evaluating arguments.
The critical thinking movement promotes critical thinking as an educational ideal.
The movement emerged with great force in the 1980s in North America as part of an ongoing critique of education as regards the thinking skills not being taught.
Relation to argumentation theory   See also: Argumentation theory  The social, communicative practice of argumentation can and should be distinguished from implication (or entailment )—a relationship between propositions; and from inference—a mental activity typically thought of as the drawing of a conclusion from premises.
Informal logic may thus be said to be a logic of argumentation, as distinguished from implication and inference.
Argumentation theory is interdisciplinary in the sense that no one discipline will be able to provide a complete account.
A full appreciation of argumentation requires insights from logic (both formal and informal), rhetoric, communication theory, linguistics, psychology, and, increasingly, computer science.
Since the 1970s, there has been significant agreement that there are three basic approaches to argumentation theory: the logical, the rhetorical and the dialectical.
According to Wenzel,  the logical approach deals with the product, the dialectical with the process, and the rhetorical with the procedure.
Thus, informal logic is one contributor to this inquiry, being most especially concerned with the norms of argument.
Establishment of a theorem using inference from the axioms  In logic and mathematics , a formal proof or derivation is a finite sequence of sentences (called well-formed formulas in the case of a formal language ), each of which is an axiom , an assumption, or follows from the preceding sentences in the sequence by a rule of inference .
It differs from a natural language argument in that it is rigorous, unambiguous and mechanically verifiable.
If the set of assumptions is empty, then the last sentence in a formal proof is called a theorem of the formal system .
The notion of theorem is not in general effective , therefore there may be no method by which we can always find a proof of a given sentence or determine that none exists.
The concepts of Fitch-style proof , sequent calculus and natural deduction are generalizations of the concept of proof.
The theorem is a syntactic consequence of all the well-formed formulas preceding it in the proof.
For a well-formed formula to qualify as part of a proof, it must be the result of applying a rule of the deductive apparatus (of some formal system) to the previous well-formed formulas in the proof sequence.
Formal proofs often are constructed with the help of computers in interactive theorem proving (e.g., through the use of proof checker and automated theorem prover ).
Significantly, these proofs can be checked automatically, also by computer.
Checking formal proofs is usually simple, while the problem of finding proofs (automated theorem proving) is usually computationally intractable and/or only semi-decidable , depending upon the formal system in use.
Background   Formal language   Main article: Formal language  A formal language is a set of finite sequences of symbols .
Such a language can be defined without reference to any meanings of any of its expressions; it can exist before any interpretation is assigned to it – that is, before it has any meaning.
Formal proofs are expressed in some formal languages.
Formal grammar   Main articles: Formal grammar and Formation rule  A formal grammar (also called formation rules ) is a precise description of the well-formed formulas of a formal language.
It is synonymous with the set of strings over the alphabet of the formal language which constitute well formed formulas.
However, it does not describe their semantics (i.e.
what they mean).
Formal systems   Main article: Formal system  A formal system (also called a logical calculus , or a logical system ) consists of a formal language together with a deductive apparatus (also called a deductive system ).
The deductive apparatus may consist of a set of transformation rules (also called inference rules ) or a set of axioms , or have both.
A formal system is used to derive one expression from one or more other expressions.
Interpretations   Main articles: Formal semantics (logic) and Interpretation (logic)  An interpretation of a formal system is the assignment of meanings to the symbols, and truth values to the sentences of a formal system.
The study of interpretations is called formal semantics .
Giving an interpretation is synonymous with constructing a model .
Language using characters or symbols  In mathematics , a symbolic language is a language that uses characters or symbols to represent concepts, such as mathematical operations , expressions , and statements , and the entities or operands on which the  operations are performed.
Branch of mathematical logic  Proof theory is a major branch  of mathematical logic and theoretical computer science within which proofs are treated as formal mathematical objects , facilitating their analysis by mathematical techniques.
Proofs are typically presented as inductively-defined  data structures such as lists , boxed lists, or trees , which are constructed according to the axioms and rules of inference of a given logical system.
Consequently, proof theory is syntactic in nature, in contrast to model theory , which is semantic in nature.
Some of the major areas of proof theory include structural proof theory , ordinal analysis , provability logic , reverse mathematics , proof mining , automated theorem proving , and proof complexity .
Much research also focuses on applications in computer science, linguistics, and philosophy.
History   Although the formalisation of logic was much advanced by the work of such figures as Gottlob Frege , Giuseppe Peano , Bertrand Russell , and Richard Dedekind , the story of modern proof theory is often seen as being established by David Hilbert , who initiated what is called Hilbert's program in the Foundations of Mathematics .
The central idea of this program was that if we could give finitary proofs of consistency for all the sophisticated formal theories needed by mathematicians, then we could ground these theories by means of a metamathematical argument, which shows that all of their purely universal assertions (more technically their provable      Π   1    0      {\displaystyle \Pi _{1}^{0}}   sentences ) are finitarily true; once so grounded we do not care about the non-finitary meaning of their existential theorems, regarding these as pseudo-meaningful stipulations of the existence of ideal entities.
The failure of the program was induced by Kurt Gödel 's incompleteness theorems , which showed that any ω-consistent theory that is sufficiently strong to express certain simple arithmetic truths, cannot prove its own consistency, which on Gödel's formulation is a      Π   1    0      {\displaystyle \Pi _{1}^{0}}   sentence.
However, modified versions of Hilbert's program emerged and research has been carried out on related topics.
This has led, in particular, to:  Refinement of Gödel's result, particularly J.
Barkley Rosser 's refinement, weakening the above requirement of ω-consistency to simple consistency;  Axiomatisation of the core of Gödel's result in terms of a modal language, provability logic ;  Transfinite iteration of theories, due to Alan Turing and Solomon Feferman ;  The discovery of self-verifying theories , systems strong enough to talk about themselves, but too weak to carry out the diagonal argument that is the key to Gödel's unprovability argument.
In parallel to the rise and fall of Hilbert's program, the foundations of structural proof theory were being founded.
Jan Łukasiewicz suggested in 1926 that one could improve on Hilbert systems as a basis for the axiomatic presentation of logic if one allowed the drawing of conclusions from assumptions in the inference rules of the logic.
In response to this, Stanisław Jaśkowski (1929) and Gerhard Gentzen (1934) independently provided such systems, called calculi of natural deduction , with Gentzen's approach introducing the idea of symmetry between the grounds for asserting propositions, expressed in introduction rules , and the consequences of accepting propositions in the elimination rules , an idea that has proved very important in proof theory.
Gentzen (1934) further introduced the idea of the sequent calculus , a calculus advanced in a similar spirit that better expressed the duality of the logical connectives,  and went on to make fundamental advances in the formalisation of intuitionistic logic,  and provide the first combinatorial proof of the consistency of Peano arithmetic .
Together, the presentation of natural deduction and the sequent calculus introduced the fundamental idea of analytic proof to proof theory.
Structural proof theory   Main article: Structural proof theory  Structural proof theory is the subdiscipline of proof theory that studies the specifics of proof calculi .
The three most well-known styles of proof calculi are:  The Hilbert calculi  The natural deduction calculi  The sequent calculi  Each of these can give a complete and axiomatic formalization of propositional or predicate logic of either the classical or intuitionistic flavour, almost any modal logic , and many substructural logics , such as relevance logic or linear logic .
Indeed, it is unusual to find a logic that resists being represented in one of these calculi.
Proof theorists are typically interested in proof calculi that support a notion of analytic proof .
The notion of analytic proof was introduced by Gentzen for the sequent calculus; there the analytic proofs are those that are cut-free .
Much of the interest in cut-free proofs comes from the subformula property : every formula in the end sequent of a cut-free proof is a subformula of one of the premises.
This allows one to show consistency of the sequent calculus easily; if the empty sequent were derivable it would have to be a subformula of some premise, which it is not.
Gentzen's midsequent theorem, the Craig interpolation theorem, and Herbrand's theorem also follow as corollaries of the cut-elimination theorem.
Gentzen's natural deduction calculus also supports a notion of analytic proof, as shown by Dag Prawitz .
The definition is slightly more complex: we say the analytic proofs are the normal forms , which are related to the notion of normal form in term rewriting.
More exotic proof calculi such as Jean-Yves Girard 's proof nets also support a notion of analytic proof.
A particular family of analytic proofs arising in reductive logic are focused proofs which characterise a large family of goal-directed proof-search procedures.
The ability to transform a proof system into a focused form is a good indication of its syntactic quality, in a manner similar to how admissibility of cut shows that a proof system is syntactically consistent.
Structural proof theory is connected to type theory by means of the Curry–Howard correspondence , which observes a structural analogy between the process of normalisation in the natural deduction calculus and beta reduction in the typed lambda calculus .
This provides the foundation for the intuitionistic type theory developed by Per Martin-Löf , and is often extended to a three way correspondence, the third leg of which are the cartesian closed categories .
Other research topics in structural theory include analytic tableau, which apply the central idea of analytic proof from structural proof theory to provide decision procedures and semi-decision procedures for a wide range of logics, and the proof theory of substructural logics.
Ordinal analysis   Main article: Ordinal analysis  Ordinal analysis is a powerful technique for providing combinatorial consistency proofs for subsystems of arithmetic, analysis, and set theory.
Gödel's second incompleteness theorem is often interpreted as demonstrating that finitistic consistency proofs are impossible for theories of sufficient strength.
Ordinal analysis allows one to measure precisely the infinitary content of the consistency of theories.
For a consistent recursively axiomatized theory T, one can prove in finitistic arithmetic that the well-foundedness of a certain transfinite ordinal implies the consistency of T.
Gödel's second incompleteness theorem implies that the well-foundedness of such an ordinal cannot be proved in the theory T.
Consequences of ordinal analysis include (1) consistency of subsystems of classical second order arithmetic and set theory relative to constructive theories, (2) combinatorial independence results, and (3) classifications of provably total recursive functions and provably well-founded ordinals.
Ordinal analysis was originated by Gentzen, who proved the consistency of Peano Arithmetic using transfinite induction up to ordinal ε 0 .
Ordinal analysis has been extended to many fragments of first and second order arithmetic and set theory.
One major challenge has been the ordinal analysis of impredicative theories.
The first breakthrough in this direction was Takeuti's proof of the consistency of Π 1 1 -CA 0 using the method of ordinal diagrams.
Provability logic   Main article: Provability logic  Provability logic is a modal logic , in which the box operator is interpreted as 'it is provable that'.
The point is to capture the notion of a proof predicate of a reasonably rich formal theory .
As basic axioms of the provability logic GL ( Gödel - Löb ), which captures provable in Peano Arithmetic , one takes modal analogues of the Hilbert-Bernays derivability conditions and Löb's theorem (if it is provable that the provability of A implies A, then A is provable).
Some of the basic results concerning the incompleteness of Peano Arithmetic and related theories have analogues in provability logic.
For example, it is a theorem in GL that if a contradiction is not provable then it is not provable that a contradiction is not provable (Gödel's second incompleteness theorem).
There are also modal analogues of the fixed-point theorem.
Robert Solovay proved that the modal logic GL is complete with respect to Peano Arithmetic.
That is, the propositional theory of provability in Peano Arithmetic is completely represented by the modal logic GL.
This straightforwardly implies that propositional reasoning about provability in Peano Arithmetic is complete and decidable.
Other research in provability logic has focused on first-order provability logic, polymodal provability logic (with one modality representing provability in the object theory and another representing provability in the meta-theory), and interpretability logics intended to capture the interaction between provability and interpretability.
Some very recent research has involved applications of graded provability algebras to the ordinal analysis of arithmetical theories.
Reverse mathematics   Main article: Reverse mathematics  Reverse mathematics is a program in mathematical logic that seeks to determine which axioms are required to prove theorems of mathematics.
The field was founded by Harvey Friedman .
Its defining method can be described as "going backwards from the theorems to the axioms ", in contrast to the ordinary mathematical practice of deriving theorems from axioms.
The reverse mathematics program was foreshadowed by results in set theory such as the classical theorem that the axiom of choice and Zorn's lemma are equivalent over ZF set theory .
The goal of reverse mathematics, however, is to study possible axioms of ordinary theorems of mathematics rather than possible axioms for set theory.
In reverse mathematics, one starts with a framework language and a base theory—a core axiom system—that is too weak to prove most of the theorems one might be interested in, but still powerful enough to develop the definitions necessary to state these theorems.
For example, to study the theorem "Every bounded sequence of real numbers has a supremum " it is necessary to use a base system that can speak of real numbers and sequences of real numbers.
For each theorem that can be stated in the base system but is not provable in the base system, the goal is to determine the particular axiom system (stronger than the base system) that is necessary to prove that theorem.
To show that a system S is required to prove a theorem T , two proofs are required.
The first proof shows T is provable from S ; this is an ordinary mathematical proof along with a justification that it can be carried out in the system S .
The second proof, known as a reversal , shows that T itself implies S ; this proof is carried out in the base system.
The reversal establishes that no axiom system S′ that extends the base system can be weaker than S while still proving T .
One striking phenomenon in reverse mathematics is the robustness of the Big Five axiom systems.
In order of increasing strength, these systems are named by the initialisms RCA 0 , WKL 0 , ACA 0 , ATR 0 , and Π 1 1 -CA 0 .
Nearly every theorem of ordinary mathematics that has been reverse mathematically analyzed has been proven equivalent to one of these five systems.
Much recent research has focused on combinatorial principles that do not fit neatly into this framework, like RT 2 2 (Ramsey's theorem for pairs).
Research in reverse mathematics often incorporates methods and techniques from recursion theory as well as proof theory.
Functional interpretations   Functional interpretations are interpretations of non-constructive theories in functional ones.
Functional interpretations usually proceed in two stages.
First, one "reduces" a classical theory C to an intuitionistic one I.
That is, one provides a constructive mapping that translates the theorems of C to the theorems of I.
Second, one reduces the intuitionistic theory I to a quantifier free theory of functionals F.
These interpretations contribute to a form of Hilbert's program, since they prove the consistency of classical theories relative to constructive ones.
Successful functional interpretations have yielded reductions of infinitary theories to finitary theories and impredicative theories to predicative ones.
Functional interpretations also provide a way to extract constructive information from proofs in the reduced theory.
As a direct consequence of the interpretation one usually obtains the result that any recursive function whose totality can be proven either in I or in C is represented by a term of F.
If one can provide an additional interpretation of F in I, which is sometimes possible, this characterization is in fact usually shown to be exact.
It often turns out that the terms of F coincide with a natural class of functions, such as the primitive recursive or polynomial-time computable functions.
Functional interpretations have also been used to provide ordinal analyses of theories and classify their provably recursive functions.
The study of functional interpretations began with Kurt Gödel's interpretation of intuitionistic arithmetic in a quantifier-free theory of functionals of finite type.
This interpretation is commonly known as the Dialectica interpretation .
Together with the double-negation interpretation of classical logic in intuitionistic logic, it provides a reduction of classical arithmetic to intuitionistic arithmetic.
Formal and informal proof   Main article: Formal proof  The informal proofs of everyday mathematical practice are unlike the formal proofs of proof theory.
They are rather like high-level sketches that would allow an expert to reconstruct a formal proof at least in principle, given enough time and patience.
For most mathematicians, writing a fully formal proof is too pedantic and long-winded to be in common use.
Formal proofs are constructed with the help of computers in interactive theorem proving .
Checking formal proofs is usually simple, whereas finding proofs ( automated theorem proving ) is generally hard.
An informal proof in the mathematics literature, by contrast, requires weeks of peer review to be checked, and may still contain errors.
Proof-theoretic semantics   Main articles: Proof-theoretic semantics and Logical harmony  In linguistics , type-logical grammar , categorial grammar and Montague grammar apply formalisms based on structural proof theory to give a formal natural language semantics .
The axiomatic method of Euclid's Elements was influential in the development of Western science.
Mathematical practice comprises the working practices of professional mathematicians : selecting theorems to prove, using informal notations to persuade themselves and others that various steps in the final proof are convincing, and seeking peer review and publication , as opposed to the end result of proven and published theorems .
Philip Kitcher has proposed a more formal definition of a mathematical practice, as a quintuple.
His intention was primarily to document mathematical practice through its historical changes.
Historical tradition   This section does not cite any sources .
Find sources:  "Mathematical practice" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  The evolution of mathematical practice was slow, and some contributors to modern mathematics did not follow even the practice of their time.
For example, Pierre de Fermat was infamous for withholding his proofs, but nonetheless had a vast reputation for correct assertions of results.
One motivation to study mathematical practice is that, despite much work in the 20th century, some still feel that the foundations of mathematics remain unclear and ambiguous.
One proposed remedy is to shift focus to some degree onto 'what is meant by a proof', and other such questions of method.
If mathematics has been informally used throughout history, in numerous cultures and continents, then it could be argued that "mathematical practice" is the practice, or use, of mathematics in everyday life.
One definition of mathematical practice, as described above, is the "working practices of professional mathematicians".
However, another definition, more in keeping with the predominant usage of mathematics, is that mathematical practice is the everyday practice, or use, of math.
Whether one is estimating the total cost of their groceries, calculating miles per gallon, or figuring out how many minutes on the treadmill that chocolate éclair will require, math in everyday life relies on practicality (i.e., does it answer the question?)
rather than formal proof.
Teaching practice   Mathematical teaching usually requires the use of several important teaching pedagogies or components.
Most GCSE , A-Level and undergraduate mathematics require the following components:  Textbooks or lecture notes which display the mathematical material to be covered/taught within the context of the teaching of mathematics.
This requires that the mathematical content being taught at the (say) undergraduate level is of a well documented and widely accepted nature that has been unanimously verified as being correct and meaningful within a mathematical context.
Workbooks.
Usually, in order to ensure that students have an opportunity to learn and test the material that they have learnt, workbooks or question papers enable mathematical understanding to be tested.
It is not unknown for exam papers to draw upon questions from such test papers, or to require prerequisite knowledge of such test papers for mathematical progression.
Exam papers and standardised (and preferably apolitical) testing methods.
Often, within countries such as the US, the UK (and, in all likelihood, China) there are standardised qualifications, examinations and workbooks that form the concrete teaching materials needed for secondary-school and pre-university courses (for example, within the UK, all students are required to sit or take Scottish Highers/Advanced Highers, A-levels or their equivalent in order to ensure that a certain minimal level of mathematical competence in a wide variety of topics has been obtained).
Note, however, that at the undergraduate, post-graduate and doctoral levels within these countries, there need not be any standardised process via which mathematicians of differing ability levels can be tested or examined.
Other common test formats within the UK and beyond include the BMO (which is a multiple-choice test competition paper used in order to determine the best candidates that are to represent countries within the International Mathematical Olympiad ).
Quasi-empiricism in mathematics is the attempt in the philosophy of mathematics to direct philosophers' attention to mathematical practice , in particular, relations with physics , social sciences , and computational mathematics , rather than solely to issues in the foundations of mathematics .
Of concern to this discussion are several topics: the relationship of empiricism (see Penelope Maddy ) with mathematics , issues related to realism , the importance of culture , necessity of application , etc.
Primary arguments   A primary argument with respect to quasi-empiricism is that whilst mathematics and physics are frequently considered to be closely linked fields of study, this may reflect human cognitive bias .
It is claimed that, despite rigorous application of appropriate empirical methods or mathematical practice in either field, this would nonetheless be insufficient to disprove alternate approaches.
Eugene Wigner (1960)   noted that this culture need not be restricted to mathematics, physics, or even humans.
He stated further that "The miracle of the appropriateness of the language of mathematics for the formulation of the laws of physics is a wonderful gift which we neither understand nor deserve.
We should be grateful for it and hope that it will remain valid in future research and that it will extend, for better or for worse, to our pleasure, even though perhaps also to our bafflement, to wide branches of learning."
Wigner used several examples to demonstrate why 'bafflement' is an appropriate description, such as showing how mathematics adds to situational knowledge in ways that are either not possible otherwise or are so outside normal thought to be of little notice.
The predictive ability, in the sense of describing potential phenomena prior to observation of such, which can be supported by a mathematical system would be another example.
Following up on Wigner , Richard Hamming (1980)  wrote about applications of mathematics as a central theme to this topic and suggested that successful use can sometimes trump proof, in the following sense: where a theorem has evident veracity through applicability, later evidence that shows the theorem's proof to be problematic would result more in trying to firm up the theorem rather than in trying to redo the applications or to deny results obtained to date.
Hamming had four explanations for the 'effectiveness' that we see with mathematics and definitely saw this topic as worthy of discussion and study.
"We see what we look for."
Why 'quasi' is apropos in reference to this discussion.
"We select the kind of mathematics to use."
Our use and modification of mathematics are essentially situational and goal-driven.
"Science in fact answers comparatively few problems."
What still needs to be looked at is a larger set.
"The evolution of man provided the model."
There may be limits attributable to the human element.
For Willard Van Orman Quine (1960),  existence is only existence in a structure.
This position is relevant to quasi-empiricism because Quine believes that the same evidence that supports theorizing about the structure of the world is the same as the evidence supporting theorizing about mathematical structures.
Hilary Putnam (1975)  stated that mathematics had accepted informal proofs and proof by authority, and had made and corrected errors all through its history.
Also, he stated that Euclid 's system of proving geometry theorems was unique to the classical Greeks and did not evolve similarly in other mathematical cultures in China , India , and Arabia .
This and other evidence led many mathematicians to reject the label of Platonists , along with Plato's ontology –  which, along with the methods and epistemology of Aristotle , had served as a foundation ontology for the Western world since its beginnings.
A truly international culture of mathematics would, Putnam and others (1983)  argued, necessarily be at least 'quasi'-empirical (embracing 'the scientific method' for consensus if not experiment).
Imre Lakatos (1976),  who did his original work on this topic for his dissertation (1961, Cambridge ), argued for ' research programs ' as a means to support a basis for mathematics and considered thought experiments as appropriate to mathematical discovery.
Lakatos may have been the first to use 'quasi-empiricism' in the context of this subject.
Operational aspects   Several recent works pertain to this topic.
Gregory Chaitin 's and Stephen Wolfram 's work, though their positions may be considered controversial, apply.
Chaitin (1997/2003)  suggests an underlying randomness to mathematics and Wolfram ( A New Kind of Science , 2002)  argues that undecidability may have practical relevance, that is, be more than an abstraction.
Another relevant addition would be the discussions concerning interactive computation , especially those related to the meaning and use of Turing 's model ( Church-Turing thesis , Turing machines , etc.).
These works are heavily computational and raise another set of issues.
To quote Chaitin (1997/2003): Now everything has gone topsy-turvy.
It's gone topsy-turvy, not because of any philosophical argument, not because of Gödel 's results or Turing 's results or my own incompleteness results.
It's gone topsy-turvy for a very simple reason—the computer!
: 96  The collection of "Undecidables" in Wolfram ( A New Kind of Science , 2002)  is another example.
Wegner's 2006 paper "Principles of Problem Solving"  suggests that interactive computation can help mathematics form a more appropriate framework ( empirical ) than can be founded with rationalism alone.
Related to this argument is that the function (even recursively related ad infinitum) is too simple a construct to handle the reality of entities that resolve (via computation or some type of analog) n-dimensional (general sense of the word) systems.
Communally-attributed mathematical results  For other uses of "folk theorem", see Folk theorem (disambiguation) .
In common mathematical parlance, a mathematical result is called folklore if it is an unpublished result with no clear originator, but which is well-circulated and believed to be true among the specialists.
More specifically, folk mathematics , or mathematical folklore , is the body of theorems, definitions, proofs, facts or techniques that circulate among mathematicians by word of mouth, but have not yet appeared in print, either in books or in scholarly journals.
Quite important at times for researchers are folk theorems , which are results known, at least to experts in a field, and are considered to have established status, though not published in complete form.
Sometimes, these are only alluded to in the public literature.
An example is a book of exercises, described on the back cover:  This book contains almost 350 exercises in the basics of ring theory .
The problems form the "folklore" of ring theory, and the solutions are given in as much detail as possible.
Another distinct category is well-knowable mathematics, a term introduced by John Conway .
These mathematical matters are known and factual, but not in active circulation in relation with current research (i.e., untrendy).
Both of these concepts are attempts to describe the actual context in which research work is done.
Some people, in particular non-mathematicians, use the term folk mathematics to refer to the informal mathematics studied in many ethno-cultural studies of mathematics.
Although the term "mathematical folklore" can also be used within the mathematics circle to describe the various aspects of their esoteric culture and practices (e.g., slang, proverb, limerick, joke).
Stories, sayings and jokes   See also: Mathematical joke     Wikiquote has quotations related to Mathematicians .
Wikiquote has quotations related to Mathematics .
Mathematical folklore can also refer to the unusual (and possibly apocryphal) stories or jokes involving mathematicians or mathematics that are told verbally in mathematics departments.
Compilations include tales collected in G.
H.
Hardy 's A Mathematician's Apology and ( Krantz 2002 ); examples include:  Srinivasa Ramanujan 's taxicab numbers  Galileo dropping weights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa .
An apple falling on Isaac Newton 's head to inspire his theory of gravitation.
The drinking, duel and early death of Galois .
Richard Feynman cracking safes in the Manhattan Project.
Alfréd Rényi 's definition of a mathematician: "a device for turning coffee into theorems".
Pál Turán 's suggestion that weak coffee was only suitable for lemma .
The " turtles all the way down " story told by Stephen Hawking .
Fermat 's lost simple proof .
The unwieldy proof and associated controversies of the Four Color Theorem .
Find sources:  "Philosophy of mathematics" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  This article's lead section  may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .
Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.
( August 2021 )  The neutrality of this article is disputed .
Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .
Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .
( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  This article is missing information about the point of view of notable mathematicians and many important philosophical problems, such as the relationship between mathematics and other sciences.
Please expand the article to include this information.
Further details may exist on the talk page .
( November 2022 )   ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  The philosophy of mathematics is the branch of philosophy that studies the assumptions, foundations, and implications of mathematics .
It aims to understand the nature and methods of mathematics, and find out the place of mathematics in people's lives.
The philosophy of mathematics has two major themes: mathematical realism and mathematical anti-realism.
History   Pythagoras is considered the father of mathematics and geometry as he set the foundation for Euclid and Euclidean geometry .
Pythagoras was the founder of Pythagoreanism : a mathematical and philosophical model to map the universe.
The origin of mathematics is of arguments and disagreements.
Whether the birth of mathematics was by chance or induced by necessity during the development of similar subjects, such as physics, remains an area of contention.
Many thinkers have contributed their ideas concerning the nature of mathematics.
Today, some  philosophers of mathematics aim to give accounts of this form of inquiry and its products as they stand, while others emphasize a role for themselves that goes beyond simple interpretation to critical analysis.
There are traditions of mathematical philosophy in both Western philosophy and Eastern philosophy .
Western philosophies of mathematics go as far back as Pythagoras , who described the theory "everything is mathematics" ( mathematicism ), Plato , who paraphrased Pythagoras, and studied the ontological status of mathematical objects, and Aristotle , who studied logic and issues related to infinity (actual versus potential).
Greek philosophy on mathematics was strongly influenced by their study of geometry .
For example, at one time, the Greeks held the opinion that 1 (one) was not a number , but rather a unit of arbitrary length.
A number was defined as a multitude.
Therefore, 3, for example, represented a certain multitude of units, and was thus "truly" a number.
At another point, a similar argument was made that 2 was not a number but a fundamental notion of a pair.
These views come from the heavily geometric straight-edge-and-compass viewpoint of the Greeks: just as lines drawn in a geometric problem are measured in proportion to the first arbitrarily drawn line, so too are the numbers on a number line measured in proportion to the arbitrary first "number" or "one".
These earlier Greek ideas of numbers were later upended by the discovery of the irrationality of the square root of two.
Hippasus , a disciple of Pythagoras , showed that the diagonal of a unit square was incommensurable with its (unit-length) edge: in other words he proved there was no existing (rational) number that accurately depicts the proportion of the diagonal of the unit square to its edge.
This caused a significant re-evaluation of Greek philosophy of mathematics.
According to legend, fellow Pythagoreans were so traumatized by this discovery that they murdered Hippasus to stop him from spreading his heretical idea.
Simon Stevin was one of the first in Europe to challenge Greek ideas in the 16th century.
Beginning with Leibniz , the focus shifted strongly to the relationship between mathematics and logic.
This perspective dominated the philosophy of mathematics through the time of Frege and of Russell , but was brought into question by developments in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Contemporary philosophy   A perennial issue in the philosophy of mathematics concerns the relationship between logic and mathematics at their joint foundations.
While 20th-century philosophers continued to ask the questions mentioned at  the outset of this article, the philosophy of mathematics in the 20th century was characterized by a predominant interest in formal logic , set theory (both naive set theory and axiomatic set theory ), and foundational issues.
It is a profound puzzle that on the one hand mathematical truths seem to have a compelling inevitability, but on the other hand the source of their "truthfulness" remains elusive.
Investigations into this issue are known as the foundations of mathematics program.
At the start of the 20th century, philosophers of mathematics were already beginning to divide into various schools of thought about all these questions, broadly distinguished by their pictures of mathematical epistemology and ontology .
Three schools, formalism , intuitionism , and logicism , emerged at this time, partly in response to the increasingly widespread worry that mathematics as it stood, and analysis in particular, did not live up to the standards of certainty and rigor that had been taken for granted.
Each school addressed the issues that came to the fore at that time, either attempting to resolve them or claiming that mathematics is not entitled to its status as our most trusted knowledge.
Surprising and counter-intuitive developments in formal logic and set theory early in the 20th century led to new questions concerning what was traditionally called the foundations of mathematics .
As the century unfolded, the initial focus of concern expanded to an open exploration of the fundamental axioms of mathematics, the axiomatic approach having been taken for granted since the time of Euclid around 300 BCE as the natural basis for mathematics.
Notions of axiom , proposition and proof , as well as the notion of a proposition being true of a mathematical object (see Assignment ), were formalized, allowing them to be treated mathematically.
The Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory were formulated which provided a conceptual framework in which much mathematical discourse would be interpreted.
In mathematics, as in physics, new and unexpected ideas had arisen and significant changes were coming.
With Gödel numbering , propositions could be interpreted as referring to themselves or other propositions, enabling inquiry into the consistency of mathematical theories.
This reflective critique in which the theory under review "becomes itself the object of a mathematical study" led Hilbert to call such study metamathematics or proof theory .
At the middle of the century, a new mathematical theory was created by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane , known as category theory , and it became a new contender for the natural language of mathematical thinking.
As the 20th century progressed, however, philosophical opinions diverged as to just how well-founded were the questions about foundations that were raised at the century's beginning.
Hilary Putnam summed up one common view of the situation in the last third of the century by saying:   When philosophy discovers something wrong with science, sometimes science has to be changed— Russell's paradox comes to mind, as does Berkeley 's attack on the actual infinitesimal —but more often it is philosophy that has to be changed.
I do not think that the difficulties that philosophy finds with classical mathematics today are genuine difficulties; and I think that the philosophical interpretations of mathematics that we are being offered on every hand are wrong, and that "philosophical interpretation" is just what mathematics doesn't need.
: 169–170    Philosophy of mathematics today proceeds along several different lines of inquiry, by philosophers of mathematics, logicians, and mathematicians, and there are many schools of thought on the subject.
The schools are addressed separately in the next section, and their assumptions explained.
Major themes   Mathematical realism   This section needs additional citations for verification .
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
( February 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Mathematical realism , like realism in general, holds that mathematical entities exist independently of the human mind .
Thus, humans do not invent mathematics, but rather discover it, and any other intelligent beings in the universe would presumably do the same.
In this point of view, there is really one sort of mathematics that can be discovered; triangles , for example, are real entities, not the creations of the human mind.
Many working mathematicians have been mathematical realists; they see themselves as discoverers of naturally occurring objects.
Examples include Paul Erdős and Kurt Gödel .
Gödel believed in an objective mathematical reality that could be perceived in a manner analogous to sense perception.
Certain principles (e.g., for any two objects, there is a collection of objects consisting of precisely those two objects) could be directly seen to be true, but the continuum hypothesis conjecture might prove undecidable just on the basis of such principles.
Gödel suggested that quasi-empirical methodology could be used to provide sufficient evidence to be able to reasonably assume such a conjecture.
Within realism, there are distinctions depending on what sort of existence one takes mathematical entities to have, and how we know about them.
Major forms of mathematical realism include Platonism and Aristotelianism .
Mathematical anti-realism   See also: Post rem structuralism  Mathematical anti-realism generally holds that mathematical statements have truth-values, but that they do not do so by corresponding to a special realm of immaterial or non-empirical entities.
Major forms of mathematical anti-realism include formalism and fictionalism .
Contemporary schools of thought   Artistic   The view that claims that mathematics is the aesthetic combination of assumptions, and then also claims that mathematics is an art .
A famous mathematician who claims that is the British G.
H.
Hardy .
For Hardy, in his book, A Mathematician's Apology , the definition of mathematics was more like the aesthetic combination of concepts.
Platonism   Main article: Platonism  See also: Modern Platonism  Mathematical Platonism is the form of realism that suggests that mathematical entities are abstract, have no spatiotemporal or causal properties, and are eternal and unchanging.
This is often claimed to be the view most people have of numbers.
The term Platonism is used because such a view is seen to parallel Plato 's Theory of Forms and a "World of Ideas" (Greek: eidos (εἶδος)) described in Plato's allegory of the cave : the everyday world can only imperfectly approximate an unchanging, ultimate reality.
Both Plato's cave and Platonism have meaningful, not just superficial connections, because Plato's ideas were preceded and probably influenced by the hugely popular Pythagoreans of ancient Greece, who believed that the world was, quite literally, generated by numbers .
A major question considered in mathematical Platonism is: Precisely where and how do the mathematical entities exist, and how do we know about them?
Is there a world, completely separate from our physical one, that is occupied by the mathematical entities?
How can we gain access to this separate world and discover truths about the entities?
One proposed answer is the Ultimate Ensemble , a theory that postulates that all structures that exist mathematically also exist physically in their own universe.
Kurt Gödel  Kurt Gödel 's Platonism  postulates a special kind of mathematical intuition that lets us perceive mathematical objects directly.
(This view bears resemblances to many things Husserl said about mathematics, and supports Kant 's idea that mathematics is synthetic  a priori .)
Davis and Hersh have suggested in their 1999 book The Mathematical Experience that most mathematicians act as though they are Platonists, even though, if pressed to defend the position carefully, they may retreat to formalism .
Full-blooded Platonism is a modern variation of Platonism, which is in reaction to the fact that different sets of mathematical entities can be proven to exist depending on the axioms and inference rules employed (for instance, the law of the excluded middle , and the axiom of choice ).
It holds that all mathematical entities exist.
They may be provable, even if they cannot all be derived from a single consistent set of axioms.
Set-theoretic realism (also set-theoretic Platonism )  a position defended by Penelope Maddy , is the view that set theory is about a single universe of sets.
This position (which is also known as naturalized Platonism because it is a naturalized version of mathematical Platonism) has been criticized by Mark Balaguer on the basis of Paul Benacerraf 's epistemological problem .
A similar view, termed Platonized naturalism , was later defended by the Stanford–Edmonton School : according to this view, a more traditional kind of Platonism is consistent with naturalism ; the more traditional kind of Platonism they defend is distinguished by general principles that assert the existence of abstract objects .
Mathematicism   Main article: Mathematicism  Max Tegmark 's mathematical universe hypothesis (or mathematicism ) goes further than Platonism in asserting that not only do all mathematical objects exist, but nothing else does.
Tegmark's sole postulate is: All structures that exist mathematically also exist physically .
That is, in the sense that "in those  complex enough to contain self-aware substructures  will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically 'real' world".
Logicism   Main article: Logicism  Logicism is the thesis that mathematics is reducible to logic, and hence nothing but a part of logic.
: 41 Logicists hold that mathematics can be known a priori , but suggest that our knowledge of mathematics is just part of our knowledge of logic in general, and is thus analytic , not requiring any special faculty of mathematical intuition.
In this view, logic is the proper foundation of mathematics, and all mathematical statements are necessary logical truths .
Rudolf Carnap (1931) presents the logicist thesis in two parts:    The concepts of mathematics can be derived from logical concepts through explicit definitions.
The theorems of mathematics can be derived from logical axioms through purely logical deduction.
Gottlob Frege was the founder of logicism.
In his seminal Die Grundgesetze der Arithmetik ( Basic Laws of Arithmetic ) he built up arithmetic from a system of logic with a general principle of comprehension, which he called "Basic Law V" (for concepts F and G , the extension of F equals the extension of G if and only if for all objects a , Fa equals Ga ), a principle that he took to be acceptable as part of logic.
Bertrand Russell  Frege's construction was flawed.
Bertrand Russell discovered that Basic Law V is inconsistent (this is Russell's paradox ).
Frege abandoned his logicist program soon after this, but it was continued by Russell and Whitehead .
They attributed the paradox to "vicious circularity" and built up what they called ramified type theory to deal with it.
In this system, they were eventually able to build up much of modern mathematics but in an altered, and excessively complex form (for example, there were different natural numbers in each type, and there were infinitely many types).
They also had to make several compromises in order to develop much of mathematics, such as the " axiom of reducibility ".
Even Russell said that this axiom did not really belong to logic.
Modern logicists (like Bob Hale , Crispin Wright , and perhaps others) have returned to a program closer to Frege's.
They have abandoned Basic Law V in favor of abstraction principles such as Hume's principle (the number of objects falling under the concept F equals the number of objects falling under the concept G if and only if the extension of F and the extension of G can be put into one-to-one correspondence ).
Frege required Basic Law V to be able to give an explicit definition of the numbers, but all the properties of numbers can be derived from Hume's principle.
This would not have been enough for Frege because (to paraphrase him) it does not exclude the possibility that the number 3 is in fact Julius Caesar.
In addition, many of the weakened principles that they have had to adopt to replace Basic Law V no longer seem so obviously analytic, and thus purely logical.
Formalism   Main article: Formalism (philosophy of mathematics)  Formalism holds that mathematical statements may be thought of as statements about the consequences of certain string manipulation rules.
For example, in the "game" of Euclidean geometry (which is seen as consisting of some strings called "axioms", and some "rules of inference" to generate new strings from given ones), one can prove that the Pythagorean theorem holds (that is, one can generate the string corresponding to the Pythagorean theorem).
According to formalism, mathematical truths are not about numbers and sets and triangles and the like—in fact, they are not "about" anything at all.
Another version of formalism is known as deductivism .
In deductivism, the Pythagorean theorem is not an absolute truth, but a relative one, if it follows deductively from the appropriate axioms.
The same is held to be true for all other mathematical statements.
Formalism need not mean that mathematics is nothing more than a meaningless symbolic game.
It is usually hoped that there exists some interpretation in which the rules of the game hold.
(Compare this position to structuralism .)
But it does allow the working mathematician to continue in his or her work and leave such problems to the philosopher or scientist.
Many formalists would say that in practice, the axiom systems to be studied will be suggested by the demands of science or other areas of mathematics.
David Hilbert  A major early proponent of formalism was David Hilbert , whose program was intended to be a complete and consistent axiomatization of all of mathematics.
Hilbert aimed to show the consistency of mathematical systems from the assumption that the "finitary arithmetic" (a subsystem of the usual arithmetic of the positive integers , chosen to be philosophically uncontroversial) was consistent.
Hilbert's goals of creating a system of mathematics that is both complete and consistent were seriously undermined by the second of Gödel's incompleteness theorems , which states that sufficiently expressive consistent axiom systems can never prove their own consistency.
Since any such axiom system would contain the finitary arithmetic as a subsystem, Gödel's theorem implied that it would be impossible to prove the system's consistency relative to that (since it would then prove its own consistency, which Gödel had shown was impossible).
Thus, in order to show that any axiomatic system of mathematics is in fact consistent, one needs to first assume the consistency of a system of mathematics that is in a sense stronger than the system to be proven consistent.
Hilbert was initially a deductivist, but, as may be clear from above, he considered certain metamathematical methods to yield intrinsically meaningful results and was a realist with respect to the finitary arithmetic.
Later, he held the opinion that there was no other meaningful mathematics whatsoever, regardless of interpretation.
Other formalists, such as Rudolf Carnap , Alfred Tarski , and Haskell Curry , considered mathematics to be the investigation of formal axiom systems .
Mathematical logicians study formal systems but are just as often realists as they are formalists.
Formalists are relatively tolerant and inviting to new approaches to logic, non-standard number systems, new set theories etc.
The more games we study, the better.
However, in all three of these examples, motivation is drawn from existing mathematical or philosophical concerns.
The "games" are usually not arbitrary.
The main critique of formalism is that the actual mathematical ideas that occupy mathematicians are far removed from the string manipulation games mentioned above.
Formalism is thus silent on the question of which axiom systems ought to be studied, as none is more meaningful than another from a formalistic point of view.
Recently, some  formalist mathematicians have proposed that all of our formal mathematical knowledge should be systematically encoded in computer-readable formats, so as to facilitate automated proof checking of mathematical proofs and the use of interactive theorem proving in the development of mathematical theories and computer software.
Because of their close connection with computer science , this idea is also advocated by mathematical intuitionists and constructivists in the "computability" tradition—see QED project for a general overview.
Conventionalism   Main articles: Conventionalism and Preintuitionism  The French mathematician  Henri Poincaré was among the first to articulate a conventionalist view.
Poincaré's use of non-Euclidean geometries in his work on differential equations convinced him that Euclidean geometry should not be regarded as a priori truth.
He held that axioms in geometry should be chosen for the results they produce, not for their apparent coherence with human intuitions about the physical world.
Intuitionism   Main article: Mathematical intuitionism  In mathematics, intuitionism is a program of methodological reform whose motto is that "there are no non-experienced mathematical truths" ( L.
E.
J.
Brouwer ).
From this springboard, intuitionists seek to reconstruct what they consider to be the corrigible portion of mathematics in accordance with Kantian concepts of being, becoming, intuition, and knowledge.
Brouwer, the founder of the movement, held that mathematical objects arise from the a priori forms of the volitions that inform the perception of empirical objects.
A major force behind intuitionism was L.
E.
J.
Brouwer , who rejected the usefulness of formalized logic of any sort for mathematics.
His student Arend Heyting postulated an intuitionistic logic , different from the classical Aristotelian logic ; this logic does not contain the law of the excluded middle and therefore frowns upon proofs by contradiction .
The axiom of choice is also rejected in most intuitionistic set theories, though in some versions it is accepted.
In intuitionism, the term "explicit construction" is not cleanly defined, and that has led to criticisms.
Attempts have been made to use the concepts of Turing machine or computable function to fill this gap, leading to the claim that only questions regarding the behavior of finite algorithms are meaningful and should be investigated in mathematics.
This has led to the study of the computable numbers , first introduced by Alan Turing .
Not surprisingly, then, this approach to mathematics is sometimes associated with theoretical computer science .
Constructivism   Main article: Constructivism (philosophy of mathematics)  Like intuitionism, constructivism involves the regulative principle that only mathematical entities which can be explicitly constructed in a certain sense should be admitted to mathematical discourse.
In this view, mathematics is an exercise of the human intuition, not a game played with meaningless symbols.
Instead, it is about entities that we can create directly through mental activity.
In addition, some adherents of these schools reject non-constructive proofs, such as using proof by contradiction when showing the existence of an object or when trying to establish the truth of some proposition.
Important work was done by Errett Bishop , who managed to prove versions of the most important theorems in real analysis as constructive analysis in his 1967 Foundations of Constructive Analysis.
Finitism   Main article: Finitism  Leopold Kronecker  Finitism is an extreme form of constructivism , according to which a mathematical object does not exist unless it can be constructed from natural numbers in a finite number of steps.
In her book Philosophy of Set Theory , Mary Tiles characterized those who allow countably infinite objects as classical finitists, and those who deny even countably infinite objects as strict finitists.
The most famous proponent of finitism was Leopold Kronecker ,  who said:  God created the natural numbers, all else is the work of man.
Ultrafinitism is an even more extreme version of finitism, which rejects not only infinities but finite quantities that cannot feasibly be constructed with available resources.
Another variant of finitism is Euclidean arithmetic, a system developed by John Penn Mayberry in his book The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets .
Mayberry's system is Aristotelian in general inspiration and, despite his strong rejection of any role for operationalism or feasibility in the foundations of mathematics, comes to somewhat similar conclusions, such as, for instance, that super-exponentiation is not a legitimate finitary function.
Structuralism   Main article: Mathematical structuralism  Structuralism is a position holding that mathematical theories describe structures, and that mathematical objects are exhaustively defined by their places in such structures, consequently having no intrinsic properties .
For instance, it would maintain that all that needs to be known about the number 1 is that it is the first whole number after 0.
Likewise all the other whole numbers are defined by their places in a structure, the number line .
Other examples of mathematical objects might include lines and planes in geometry, or elements and operations in abstract algebra .
Structuralism is an epistemologically  realistic view in that it holds that mathematical statements have an objective truth value.
However, its central claim only relates to what kind of entity a mathematical object is, not to what kind of existence mathematical objects or structures have (not, in other words, to their ontology ).
The kind of existence mathematical objects have would clearly be dependent on that of the structures in which they are embedded; different sub-varieties of structuralism make different ontological claims in this regard.
The ante rem structuralism ("before the thing") has a similar ontology to Platonism .
Structures are held to have a real but abstract and immaterial existence.
As such, it faces the standard epistemological problem of explaining the interaction between such abstract structures and flesh-and-blood mathematicians (see Benacerraf's identification problem ).
The in re structuralism ("in the thing") is the equivalent of Aristotelian realism .
Structures are held to exist inasmuch as some concrete system exemplifies them.
This incurs the usual issues that some perfectly legitimate structures might accidentally happen not to exist, and that a finite physical world might not be "big" enough to accommodate some otherwise legitimate structures.
The post rem structuralism ("after the thing") is anti-realist about structures in a way that parallels nominalism .
Like nominalism, the post rem approach denies the existence of abstract mathematical objects with properties other than their place in a relational structure.
According to this view mathematical systems exist, and have structural features in common.
If something is true of a structure, it will be true of all systems exemplifying the structure.
However, it is merely instrumental to talk of structures being "held in common" between systems: they in fact have no independent existence.
Embodied mind theories   Embodied mind theories hold that mathematical thought is a natural outgrowth of the human cognitive apparatus which finds itself in our physical universe.
For example, the abstract concept of number springs from the experience of counting discrete objects (requiring the human senses such as sight for detecting the objects, touch; and signalling from the brain).
It is held that mathematics is not universal and does not exist in any real sense, other than in human brains.
Humans construct, but do not discover, mathematics.
The cognitive processes of pattern-finding and distinguishing objects are also subject to neuroscience ; if mathematics is considered to be relevant to a natural world (such as from realism or a degree of it, as opposed to pure solipsism ).
Its actual relevance to reality, while accepted to be a trustworthy approximation (it is also suggested the evolution of perceptions, the body, and the senses may have been necessary for survival) is not necessarily accurate to a full realism (and is still subject to flaws such as illusion , assumptions (consequently; the foundations and axioms in which mathematics have been formed by humans), generalisations, deception, and hallucinations ).
As such, this may also raise questions for the modern scientific method for its compatibility with general mathematics; as while relatively reliable, it is still limited by what can be measured by empiricism which may not be as reliable as previously assumed (see also: 'counterintuitive' concepts in such as quantum nonlocality , and action at a distance ).
Another issue is that one numeral system may not necessarily be applicable to problem solving.
Subjects such as complex numbers or imaginary numbers require specific changes to more commonly used axioms of mathematics; otherwise they cannot be adequately understood.
Alternatively, computer programmers may use hexadecimal for its 'human-friendly' representation of binary-coded values, rather than decimal (convenient for counting because humans have ten fingers).
The axioms or logical rules behind mathematics also vary through time (such as the adaption and invention of zero ).
As perceptions from the human brain are subject to illusions , assumptions, deceptions, (induced) hallucinations , cognitive errors or assumptions in a general context, it can be questioned whether they are accurate or strictly indicative of truth (see also: philosophy of being ), and the nature of empiricism itself in relation to the universe and whether it is independent to the senses and the universe.
The human mind has no special claim on reality or approaches to it built out of math.
If such constructs as Euler's identity are true then they are true as a map of the human mind and cognition .
Embodied mind theorists thus explain the effectiveness of mathematics—mathematics was constructed by the brain in order to be effective in this universe.
The most accessible, famous, and infamous treatment of this perspective is Where Mathematics Comes From , by George Lakoff and Rafael E.
Núñez .
In addition, mathematician Keith Devlin has investigated similar concepts with his book The Math Instinct , as has neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene with his book The Number Sense .
For more on the philosophical ideas that inspired this perspective, see cognitive science of mathematics .
Aristotelian realism   Main article: Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics  See also: In re structuralism and Immanent realism  Aristotelian realism holds that mathematics studies properties such as symmetry, continuity and order that can be literally realized in the physical world (or in any other world there might be).
It contrasts with Platonism in holding that the objects of mathematics, such as numbers, do not exist in an "abstract" world but can be physically realized.
For example, the number 4 is realized in the relation between a heap of parrots and the universal "being a parrot" that divides the heap into so many parrots.
Aristotelian realism is defended by James Franklin and the Sydney School in the philosophy of mathematics and is close to the view of Penelope Maddy that when an egg carton is opened, a set of three eggs is perceived (that is, a mathematical entity realized in the physical world).
A problem for Aristotelian realism is what account to give of higher infinities, which may not be realizable in the physical world.
The Euclidean arithmetic developed by John Penn Mayberry in his book The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets  also falls into the Aristotelian realist tradition.
Mayberry, following Euclid, considers numbers to be simply "definite multitudes of units" realized in nature—such as "the members of the London Symphony Orchestra" or "the trees in Birnam wood".
Whether or not there are definite multitudes of units for which Euclid's Common Notion 5 (the whole is greater than the part) fails and which would consequently be reckoned as infinite is for Mayberry essentially a question about Nature and does not entail any transcendental suppositions.
Psychologism   Main article: Psychologism  See also: Anti-psychologism  Psychologism in the philosophy of mathematics is the position that mathematical  concepts and/or truths are grounded in, derived from or explained by psychological facts (or laws).
John Stuart Mill seems to have been an advocate of a type of logical psychologism, as were many 19th-century German logicians such as Sigwart and Erdmann as well as a number of psychologists , past and present: for example, Gustave Le Bon .
Psychologism was famously criticized by Frege in his The Foundations of Arithmetic , and many of his works and essays, including his review of Husserl 's Philosophy of Arithmetic .
Edmund Husserl, in the first volume of his Logical Investigations , called "The Prolegomena of Pure Logic", criticized psychologism thoroughly and sought to distance himself from it.
The "Prolegomena" is considered a more concise, fair, and thorough refutation of psychologism than the criticisms made by Frege, and also it is considered today by many as being a memorable refutation for its decisive blow to psychologism.
Psychologism was also criticized by Charles Sanders Peirce and Maurice Merleau-Ponty .
Empiricism   Main articles: Quasi-empiricism in mathematics and Postmodern mathematics  Mathematical empiricism is a form of realism that denies that mathematics can be known a priori at all.
It says that we discover mathematical facts by empirical research , just like facts in any of the other sciences.
It is not one of the classical three positions advocated in the early 20th century, but primarily arose in the middle of the century.
However, an important early proponent of a view like this was John Stuart Mill .
Mill's view was widely criticized, because, according to critics, such as A.J.
Ayer,  it makes statements like "2 + 2 = 4" come out as uncertain, contingent truths, which we can only learn by observing instances of two pairs coming together and forming a quartet.
Karl Popper was another philosopher to point out empirical aspects of mathematics, observing that "most mathematical theories are, like those of physics and biology, hypothetico-deductive: pure mathematics therefore turns out to be much closer to the natural sciences whose hypotheses are conjectures, than it seemed even recently."
Popper also noted he would "admit a system as empirical or scientific only if it is capable of being tested by experience."
Contemporary mathematical empiricism, formulated by W.
V.
O.
Quine and Hilary Putnam , is primarily supported by the indispensability argument : mathematics is indispensable to all empirical sciences, and if we want to believe in the reality of the phenomena described by the sciences, we ought also believe in the reality of those entities required for this description.
That is, since physics needs to talk about electrons to say why light bulbs behave as they do, then electrons must exist .
Since physics needs to talk about numbers in offering any of its explanations, then numbers must exist.
In keeping with Quine and Putnam's overall philosophies, this is a naturalistic argument.
It argues for the existence of mathematical entities as the best explanation for experience, thus stripping mathematics of being distinct from the other sciences.
Putnam strongly rejected the term " Platonist " as implying an over-specific ontology that was not necessary to mathematical practice in any real sense.
He advocated a form of "pure realism" that rejected mystical notions of truth and accepted much quasi-empiricism in mathematics .
This grew from the increasingly popular assertion in the late 20th century that no one foundation of mathematics could be ever proven to exist.
It is also sometimes called "postmodernism in mathematics" although that term is considered overloaded by some and insulting by others.
Quasi-empiricism argues that in doing their research, mathematicians test hypotheses as well as prove theorems.
A mathematical argument can transmit falsity from the conclusion to the premises just as well as it can transmit truth from the premises to the conclusion.
Putnam has argued that any theory of mathematical realism would include quasi-empirical methods.
He proposed that an alien species doing mathematics might well rely on quasi-empirical methods primarily, being willing often to forgo rigorous and axiomatic proofs, and still be doing mathematics—at perhaps a somewhat greater risk of failure of their calculations.
He gave a detailed argument for this in New Directions .
Quasi-empiricism was also developed by Imre Lakatos .
The most important criticism of empirical views of mathematics is approximately the same as that raised against Mill.
If mathematics is just as empirical as the other sciences, then this suggests that its results are just as fallible as theirs, and just as contingent.
In Mill's case the empirical justification comes directly, while in Quine's case it comes indirectly, through the coherence of our scientific theory as a whole, i.e.
consilience after E.O.
Wilson .
Quine suggests that mathematics seems completely certain because the role it plays in our web of belief is extraordinarily central, and that it would be extremely difficult for us to revise it, though not impossible.
For a philosophy of mathematics that attempts to overcome some of the shortcomings of Quine and Gödel's approaches by taking aspects of each see Penelope Maddy 's Realism in Mathematics .
Another example of a realist theory is the embodied mind theory .
For experimental evidence suggesting that human infants can do elementary arithmetic, see Brian Butterworth .
Fictionalism   See also: Fictionalism  Mathematical fictionalism was brought to fame in 1980 when Hartry Field published Science Without Numbers ,  which rejected and in fact reversed Quine's indispensability argument.
Where Quine suggested that mathematics was indispensable for our best scientific theories, and therefore should be accepted as a body of truths talking about independently existing entities, Field suggested that mathematics was dispensable, and therefore should be considered as a body of falsehoods not talking about anything real.
He did this by giving a complete axiomatization of Newtonian mechanics with no reference to numbers or functions at all.
He started with the "betweenness" of Hilbert's axioms to characterize space without coordinatizing it, and then added extra relations between points to do the work formerly done by vector fields .
Hilbert's geometry is mathematical, because it talks about abstract points, but in Field's theory, these points are the concrete points of physical space, so no special mathematical objects at all are needed.
Having shown how to do science without using numbers, Field proceeded to rehabilitate mathematics as a kind of useful fiction .
He showed that mathematical physics is a conservative extension of his non-mathematical physics (that is, every physical fact provable in mathematical physics is already provable from Field's system), so that mathematics is a reliable process whose physical applications are all true, even though its own statements are false.
Thus, when doing mathematics, we can see ourselves as telling a sort of story, talking as if numbers existed.
For Field, a statement like "2 + 2 = 4" is just as fictitious as " Sherlock Holmes lived at 221B Baker Street"—but both are true according to the relevant fictions.
Another fictionalist, Mary Leng , expresses the perspective succinctly by dismissing any seeming connection between mathematics and the physical world as "a happy coincidence".
This rejection separates fictionalism from other forms of anti-realism, which see mathematics itself as artificial but still bounded or fitted to reality in some way.
By this account, there are no metaphysical or epistemological problems special to mathematics.
The only worries left are the general worries about non-mathematical physics, and about fiction in general.
Field's approach has been very influential, but is widely rejected.
This is in part because of the requirement of strong fragments of second-order logic to carry out his reduction, and because the statement of conservativity seems to require quantification over abstract models or deductions.
Social constructivism   Main article: Social constructivism  Social constructivism sees mathematics primarily as a social construct , as a product of culture, subject to correction and change.
Like the other sciences, mathematics is viewed as an empirical endeavor whose results are constantly evaluated and may be discarded.
However, while on an empiricist view the evaluation is some sort of comparison with "reality", social constructivists emphasize that the direction of mathematical research is dictated by the fashions of the social group performing it or by the needs of the society financing it.
However, although such external forces may change the direction of some mathematical research, there are strong internal constraints—the mathematical traditions, methods, problems, meanings and values into which mathematicians are enculturated—that work to conserve the historically-defined discipline.
This runs counter to the traditional beliefs of working mathematicians, that mathematics is somehow pure or objective.
But social constructivists argue that mathematics is in fact grounded by much uncertainty: as mathematical practice evolves, the status of previous mathematics is cast into doubt, and is corrected to the degree it is required or desired by the current mathematical community.
This can be seen in the development of analysis from reexamination of the calculus of Leibniz and Newton.
They argue further that finished mathematics is often accorded too much status, and folk mathematics not enough, due to an overemphasis on axiomatic proof and peer review as practices.
The social nature of mathematics is highlighted in its subcultures .
Major discoveries can be made in one branch of mathematics and be relevant to another, yet the relationship goes undiscovered for lack of social contact between mathematicians.
Social constructivists argue each speciality forms its own epistemic community and often has great difficulty communicating, or motivating the investigation of unifying conjectures that might relate different areas of mathematics.
Social constructivists see the process of "doing mathematics" as actually creating the meaning, while social realists see a deficiency either of human capacity to abstractify, or of human's cognitive bias , or of mathematicians' collective intelligence as preventing the comprehension of a real universe of mathematical objects.
Social constructivists sometimes reject the search for foundations of mathematics as bound to fail, as pointless or even meaningless.
Contributions to this school have been made by Imre Lakatos and Thomas Tymoczko , although it is not clear that either would endorse the title.
More recently Paul Ernest has explicitly formulated a social constructivist philosophy of mathematics.
Some consider the work of Paul Erdős as a whole to have advanced this view (although he personally rejected it) because of his uniquely broad collaborations, which prompted others to see and study "mathematics as a social activity", e.g., via the Erdős number .
Reuben Hersh has also promoted the social view of mathematics, calling it a "humanistic" approach,  similar to but not quite the same as that associated with Alvin White;  one of Hersh's co-authors, Philip J.
Davis , has expressed sympathy for the social view as well.
Beyond the traditional schools   Unreasonable effectiveness   Rather than focus on narrow debates about the true nature of mathematical truth , or even on practices unique to mathematicians such as the proof , a growing movement from the 1960s to the 1990s began to question the idea of seeking foundations or finding any one right answer to why mathematics works.
The starting point for this was Eugene Wigner 's famous 1960 paper " The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences ", in which he argued that the happy coincidence of mathematics and physics being so well matched seemed to be unreasonable and hard to explain.
Popper's two senses of number statements   Realist and constructivist theories are normally taken to be contraries.
However, Karl Popper  argued that a number statement such as "2 apples + 2 apples = 4 apples" can be taken in two senses.
In one sense it is irrefutable and logically true.
In the second sense it is factually true and falsifiable.
Another way of putting this is to say that a single number statement can express two propositions: one of which can be explained on constructivist lines; the other on realist lines.
Philosophy of language   This section possibly contains original research .
( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Innovations in the philosophy of language during the 20th century renewed interest in whether mathematics is, as is often said,  the language of science.
Although some  mathematicians and philosophers would accept the statement "mathematics is a language" (most consider that the language of mathematics is a part of mathematics to which mathematics cannot be reduced),  linguists  believe that the implications of such a statement must be considered.
For example, the tools of linguistics are not generally applied to the symbol systems of mathematics, that is, mathematics is studied in a markedly different way from other languages.
If mathematics is a language, it is a different type of language from natural languages .
Indeed, because of the need for clarity and specificity, the language of mathematics is far more constrained than natural languages studied by linguists.
However, the methods developed by Frege and Tarski for the study of mathematical language have been extended greatly by Tarski's student Richard Montague and other linguists working in formal semantics to show that the distinction between mathematical language and natural language may not be as great as it seems.
Mohan Ganesalingam has analysed mathematical language using tools from formal linguistics.
Ganesalingam notes that some features of natural language are not necessary when analysing mathematical language (such as tense ), but many of the same analytical tools can be used (such as context-free grammars ).
One important difference is that mathematical objects have clearly defined types , which can be explicitly defined in a text: "Effectively, we are allowed to introduce a word in one part of a sentence, and declare its part of speech in another; and this operation has no analogue in natural language."
: 251   Arguments   Indispensability argument for realism   Main article: Quine–Putnam indispensability argument  This argument, associated with Willard Quine and Hilary Putnam , is considered by Stephen Yablo to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities, such as numbers and sets.
The form of the argument is as follows.
One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories, and to those entities only (commonly referred to as "all and only").
Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories.
Therefore,  One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities.
The justification for the first premise is the most controversial.
Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the "only" part of "all and only".
The assertion that "all" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism .
Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories.
This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry , but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position.
Epistemic argument against realism   The anti-realist " epistemic argument" against Platonism has been made by Paul Benacerraf and Hartry Field .
Platonism posits that mathematical objects are abstract entities.
By general agreement, abstract entities cannot interact causally with concrete, physical entities ("the truth-values of our mathematical assertions depend on facts involving Platonic entities that reside in a realm outside of space-time"  ).
Whilst our knowledge of concrete, physical objects is based on our ability to perceive them, and therefore to causally interact with them, there is no parallel account of how mathematicians come to have knowledge of abstract objects.
Another way of making the point is that if the Platonic world were to disappear, it would make no difference to the ability of mathematicians to generate proofs , etc., which is already fully accountable in terms of physical processes in their brains.
Field developed his views into fictionalism .
Benacerraf also developed the philosophy of mathematical structuralism , according to which there are no mathematical objects.
Nonetheless, some versions of structuralism are compatible with some versions of realism.
The argument hinges on the idea that a satisfactory naturalistic account of thought processes in terms of brain processes can be given for mathematical reasoning along with everything else.
One line of defense is to maintain that this is false, so that mathematical reasoning uses some special intuition that involves contact with the Platonic realm.
A modern form of this argument is given by Sir Roger Penrose .
Another line of defense is to maintain that abstract objects are relevant to mathematical reasoning in a way that is non-causal, and not analogous to perception.
This argument is developed by Jerrold Katz in his 2000 book Realistic Rationalism .
A more radical defense is denial of physical reality, i.e.
the mathematical universe hypothesis .
In that case, a mathematician's knowledge of mathematics is one mathematical object making contact with another.
Aesthetics   This section needs additional citations for verification .
( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Many practicing mathematicians have been drawn to their subject because of a sense of beauty they perceive in it.
One sometimes hears the sentiment that mathematicians would like to leave philosophy to the philosophers and get back to mathematics—where, presumably, the beauty lies.
In his work on the divine proportion , H.E.
Huntley relates the feeling of reading and understanding someone else's proof of a theorem of mathematics to that of a viewer of a masterpiece of art—the reader of a proof has a similar sense of exhilaration at understanding as the original author of the proof, much as, he argues, the viewer of a masterpiece has a sense of exhilaration similar to the original painter or sculptor.
Indeed, one can study mathematical and scientific writings as literature .
Philip J.
Davis and Reuben Hersh have commented that the sense of mathematical beauty is universal amongst practicing mathematicians.
By way of example, they provide two proofs of the irrationality of √ 2 .
The first is the traditional proof by contradiction , ascribed to Euclid ; the second is a more direct proof involving the fundamental theorem of arithmetic that, they argue, gets to the heart of the issue.
Davis and Hersh argue that mathematicians find the second proof more aesthetically appealing because it gets closer to the nature of the problem.
Paul Erdős was well known for his notion of a hypothetical "Book" containing the most elegant or beautiful mathematical proofs.
There is not universal agreement that a result has one "most elegant" proof; Gregory Chaitin has argued against this idea.
Philosophers have sometimes criticized mathematicians' sense of beauty or elegance as being, at best, vaguely stated.
By the same token, however, philosophers of mathematics have sought to characterize what makes one proof more desirable than another when both are logically sound.
Another aspect of aesthetics concerning mathematics is mathematicians' views towards the possible uses of mathematics for purposes deemed unethical or inappropriate.
The best-known exposition of this view occurs in G.
H.
Hardy 's book A Mathematician's Apology , in which Hardy argues that pure mathematics is superior in beauty to applied mathematics precisely because it cannot be used for war and similar ends.
Find sources:  "Language of mathematics" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  The language of mathematics or mathematical language is an extension of the natural language (for example English ) that is used in mathematics and in science for expressing results ( scientific laws , theorems , proofs , logical deductions , etc) with concision, precision and unambiguity.
Features   The main features of the mathematical language are the following.
Use of common words with a derived meaning, generally more specific and more precise.
For example, " or " means "one, the other or both", while, in common language, "both" is sometimes included and sometimes not.
Also, a " line " is straight and has zero width.
Use of common words with a meaning that is completely different from their common meaning.
For example, a mathematical ring is not related to any other meaning of "ring".
Real numbers and imaginary numbers are two sorts of numbers, none being more real or more imaginary than the others.
Use of neologisms .
For example polynomial , homomorphism .
Use of symbols as words or phrases.
For example,     A  =  B    {\displaystyle A=B}   and     ∀  x    {\displaystyle \forall x}   are respectively read as "     A    {\displaystyle A}   equals     B    {\displaystyle B}   " and "for all     x    {\displaystyle x}   ".
Use of formulas as part of sentences.
For example: "     E  =  m   c   2      {\displaystyle E=mc^{2}}    represents quantitatively the mass–energy equivalence .
"
A formula that is not included in a sentence is generally meaningless, since the meaning of the symbols may depend on the context: in "     E  =  m   c   2      {\displaystyle E=mc^{2}}   ", this is the context that specifies that E is the energy of a physical body , m is its mass , and c is the speed of light .
Use of mathematical jargon that consists of phrases that are used for informal explanations or shorthands.
For example, "killing" is often used in place of "replacing with zero", and this led to the use of assassinator and annihilator as technical words.
Understanding mathematical text   The consequence of these features is that a mathematical text is generally not understandable without some prerequisite knowledge.
For example the sentence " a free module is a module that has a basis " is perfectly correct, although it appears only as a grammatically correct nonsense, when one does not know the definitions of basis , module , and free module .
H.
B.
Williams , an electrophysiologist , wrote in 1927:  Now mathematics is both a body of truth and a special language, a language more carefully defined and more highly abstracted than our ordinary medium of thought and expression.
Also it differs from ordinary languages in this important particular: it is subject to rules of manipulation.
Once a statement is cast into mathematical form it may be manipulated in accordance with these rules and every configuration of the symbols will represent facts in harmony with and dependent on those contained in the original statement.
Now this comes very close to what we conceive the action of the brain structures to be in performing intellectual acts with the symbols of ordinary language.
In a sense, therefore, the mathematician has been able to perfect a device through which a part of the labor of logical thought is carried on outside the central nervous system with only that supervision which is requisite to manipulate the symbols in accordance with the rules.
: 291  Page notice  You are not logged in.
Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "  Part of a series on Philosophy    Philosophy portal  Contents  Outline  Lists  Glossary  History  Categories  Disambiguation   Philosophies  By period  Ancient  Ancient Egyptian  Ancient Greek  Medieval  Renaissance  Modern  Contemporary  Analytic  Continental   By region  African  Egypt  Ethiopia  South Africa  Eastern philosophy  Chinese  Indian  Indonesia  Japan  Korea  Vietnam  Indigenous American  Aztec philosophy  Middle Eastern philosophy  Iranian  Western  American  British  French  German  Italian  Russian   By religion  Buddhist  Confucian  Christian  Hindu  Islamic  Jain  Jewish  Taoist    Branches  Epistemology  Ethics  Logic  Metaphysics   Aesthetics  Education  History  Language  Law  Metaphilosophy  Mind  Ontology  Phenomenology  Political  Religion  Science   Philosophers  Aestheticians  Epistemologists  Ethicists  Logicians  Metaphysicians  Philosophers of mind  Social and political philosophers  Women in philosophy  v t e  The history of logic deals with the study of the development of the science of valid inference ( logic ).
Formal logics developed in ancient times in India , China , and Greece .
Greek methods, particularly Aristotelian logic (or term logic) as found in the Organon , found wide application and acceptance in Western science and mathematics for millennia.
The Stoics , especially Chrysippus , began the development of predicate logic .
Christian and Islamic philosophers such as Boethius (died 524), Ibn Sina (Avicenna, died 1037), Thomas Aquinas (died 1274) and William of Ockham (died 1347) further developed Aristotle's logic in the Middle Ages , reaching a high point in the mid-fourteenth century, with Jean Buridan .
The period between the fourteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century saw largely decline and neglect, and at least one historian of logic regards this time as barren.
Empirical methods ruled the day, as evidenced by Sir Francis Bacon 's Novum Organon of 1620.
Logic revived in the mid-nineteenth century, at the beginning of a revolutionary period when the subject developed into a rigorous and formal discipline which took as its exemplar the exact method of proof used in mathematics , a hearkening back to the Greek tradition.
The development of the modern "symbolic" or "mathematical" logic during this period by the likes of Boole , Frege , Russell , and Peano is the most significant in the two-thousand-year history of logic, and is arguably one of the most important and remarkable events in human intellectual history .
Progress in mathematical logic in the first few decades of the twentieth century, particularly arising from the work of Gödel and Tarski , had a significant impact on analytic philosophy and philosophical logic , particularly from the 1950s onwards, in subjects such as modal logic , temporal logic , deontic logic , and relevance logic .
Logic in the East   Logic in India   Main article: Indian logic  Hindu logic   Origin   The Nasadiya Sukta of the Rigveda ( RV 10 .129) contains ontological speculation in terms of various logical divisions that were later recast formally as the four circles of catuskoti : "A", "not A", "A and 'not A'", and "not A and not not A".
Who really knows?
Who will here proclaim it?
Whence was it produced?
Whence is this creation?
The gods came afterwards, with the creation of this universe.
Who then knows whence it has arisen?
— Nasadiya Sukta , concerns the origin of the universe , Rig Veda , 10:129-6      Logic began independently in ancient India and continued to develop to early modern times without any known influence from Greek logic.
Before Gautama   Though the origins in India of public debate ( pariṣad ), one form of rational inquiry, are not clear, we know that public debates were common in preclassical India, for they are frequently alluded to in various Upaniṣads and in the early Buddhist literature.
Public debate is not the only form of public deliberations in preclassical India.
Assemblies ( pariṣad or sabhā ) of various sorts, comprising relevant experts, were regularly convened to deliberate on a variety of matters, including administrative, legal and religious matters.
Dattatreya   A philosopher named Dattatreya is stated in the Bhagavata purana to have taught Anviksiki to Aiarka, Prahlada and others.
It appears from the Markandeya purana that the Anviksiki-vidya expounded by him consisted of a mere disquisition on soul in accordance with the yoga philosophy.
Dattatreya expounded the philosophical side of Anvlksiki and not its logical aspect.
Medhatithi Gautama   While the teachers mentioned before dealt with some particular topics of Anviksiki, the credit of founding the Anviksiki in its special sense of a science is to be attributed to Medhatithi Gautama (c.
6th century BC).
Guatama founded the anviksiki school of logic.
The Mahabharata (12.173.45), around the 5th century BC, refers to the anviksiki and tarka schools of logic.
Panini   Pāṇini (c.
5th century BC) developed a form of logic (to which Boolean logic has some similarities) for his formulation of Sanskrit grammar .
Logic is described by Chanakya (c.
350–283 BC) in his Arthashastra as an independent field of inquiry.
Nyaya-Vaisheshika   Two of the six Indian schools of thought deal with logic: Nyaya and Vaisheshika .
The Nyāya Sūtras of Aksapada Gautama (c.
2nd century AD) constitute the core texts of the Nyaya school, one of the six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy.
This realist school developed a rigid five-member schema of inference involving an initial premise, a reason, an example, an application, and a conclusion.
The idealist  Buddhist philosophy became the chief opponent to the Naiyayikas.
Jain Logic   Umaswati (2nd century AD), author of first Jain work in Sanskrit, Tattvārthasūtra , expounding the Jain philosophy in a most systematized form acceptable to all sects of Jainism.
Jains made its own unique contribution to this mainstream development of logic by also occupying itself with the basic epistemological issues, namely, with those concerning the nature of knowledge, how knowledge is derived, and in what way knowledge can be said to be reliable.
The Jains have doctrines of relativity used for logic and reasoning:  Anekāntavāda – the theory of relative pluralism or manifoldness;  Syādvāda – the theory of conditioned predication and;  Nayavāda – The theory of partial standpoints.
These Jain philosophical concepts made most important contributions to the ancient Indian philosophy , especially in the areas of skepticism and relativity.
Buddhist logic   Nagarjuna   Nagarjuna (c.
150–250 AD), the founder of the Madhyamaka ("Middle Way") developed an analysis known as the catuṣkoṭi (Sanskrit), a "four-cornered" system of argumentation that involves the systematic examination and rejection of each of the 4 possibilities of a proposition, P :  P ; that is, being.
not P ; that is, not being.
Painting of Nāgārjuna from the Shingon Hassozō , a series of scrolls authored by the Shingon school of Buddhism.
Japan, Kamakura period (13th–14th century) P and not P ; that is, being and not being.
not ( P or not P ); that is, neither being nor not being.
Under propositional logic , De Morgan's laws would imply that this case is equivalent to the third case ( P and not P ), and would be therefore superfluous, with only 3 actual cases to consider.
Dignaga   However, Dignāga (c 480–540 AD) is sometimes said to have developed a formal syllogism,  and it was through him and his successor, Dharmakirti , that Buddhist logic reached its height; it is contested whether their analysis actually constitutes a formal syllogistic system.
In particular, their analysis centered on the definition of an inference-warranting relation, " vyapti ", also known as invariable concomitance or pervasion.
To this end, a doctrine known as "apoha" or differentiation was developed.
This involved what might be called inclusion and exclusion of defining properties.
Dignāga's famous "wheel of reason" ( Hetucakra ) is a method of indicating when one thing (such as smoke) can be taken as an invariable sign of another thing (like fire), but the inference is often inductive and based on past observation.
Matilal remarks that Dignāga's analysis is much like John Stuart Mill's Joint Method of Agreement and Difference, which is inductive.
Logic in China   Main article: Logic in China  In China, a contemporary of Confucius , Mozi , "Master Mo", is credited with founding the Mohist school , whose canons dealt with issues relating to valid inference and the conditions of correct conclusions.
In particular, one of the schools that grew out of Mohism, the Logicians , are credited by some scholars for their early investigation of formal logic .
Due to the harsh rule of Legalism in the subsequent Qin Dynasty , this line of investigation disappeared in China until the introduction of Indian philosophy by Buddhists .
Logic in the West   Prehistory of logic   Valid reasoning has been employed in all periods of human history.
However, logic studies the principles of valid reasoning, inference and demonstration.
It is probable that the idea of demonstrating a conclusion first arose in connection with geometry , which originally meant the same as "land measurement".
The ancient Egyptians discovered geometry , including the formula for the volume of a truncated pyramid .
Ancient Babylon was also skilled in mathematics.
Esagil-kin-apli 's medical Diagnostic Handbook in the 11th century BC was based on a logical set of axioms and assumptions,  while Babylonian astronomers in the 8th and 7th centuries BC employed an internal logic within their predictive planetary systems, an important contribution to the philosophy of science .
Ancient Greece before Aristotle   While the ancient Egyptians empirically discovered some truths of geometry, the great achievement of the ancient Greeks was to replace empirical methods by demonstrative proof .
Both Thales and Pythagoras of the Pre-Socratic philosophers seemed aware of geometric methods.
Fragments of early proofs are preserved in the works of Plato and Aristotle,  and the idea of a deductive system was probably known in the Pythagorean school and the Platonic Academy .
The proofs of Euclid of Alexandria are a paradigm of Greek geometry.
The three basic principles of geometry are as follows:  Certain propositions must be accepted as true without demonstration; such a proposition is known as an axiom of geometry.
Every proposition that is not an axiom of geometry must be demonstrated as following from the axioms of geometry; such a demonstration is known as a proof or a "derivation" of the proposition.
The proof must be formal ; that is, the derivation of the proposition must be independent of the particular subject matter in question.
Further evidence that early Greek thinkers were concerned with the principles of reasoning is found in the fragment called dissoi logoi , probably written at the beginning of the fourth century BC.
This is part of a protracted debate about truth and falsity.
In the case of the classical Greek city-states, interest in argumentation was also stimulated by the activities of the Rhetoricians or Orators and the Sophists , who used arguments to defend or attack a thesis, both in legal and political contexts.
Thales Theorem  Thales   It is said Thales, most widely regarded as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition ,   measured the height of the pyramids by their shadows at the moment when his own shadow was equal to his height.
Thales was said to have had a sacrifice in celebration of discovering Thales' theorem just as Pythagoras had the Pythagorean theorem .
Thales is the first known individual to use deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to his theorem, and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed.
Indian and Babylonian mathematicians knew his theorem for special cases before he proved it.
It is believed that Thales learned that an angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle during his travels to Babylon .
Pythagoras   Proof of the Pythagorean Theorem in Euclid's Elements  Before 520 BC, on one of his visits to Egypt or Greece, Pythagoras might have met the c.
54 years older Thales.
The systematic study of proof seems to have begun with the school of Pythagoras (i.
e.
the Pythagoreans) in the late sixth century BC.
Indeed, the Pythagoreans, believing all was number, are the first philosophers to emphasize form rather than matter .
Heraclitus and Parmenides   The writing of Heraclitus (c.
535 – c.
475 BC) was the first place where the word logos was given special attention in ancient Greek philosophy,  Heraclitus held that everything changes and all was fire  and conflicting opposites, seemingly unified only by this Logos .
He is known for his obscure sayings.
This logos holds always but humans always prove unable to understand it, both before hearing it and when they have first heard it.
For though all things come to be in accordance with this logos , humans are like the inexperienced when they experience such words and deeds as I set out, distinguishing each in accordance with its nature and saying how it is.
But other people fail to notice what they do when awake, just as they forget what they do while asleep.
— Diels-Kranz , 22B1  Parmenides has been called the discoverer of logic.
In contrast to Heraclitus, Parmenides held that all is one and nothing changes.
He may have been a dissident Pythagorean, disagreeing that One (a number) produced the many.
"X is not" must always be false or meaningless.
What exists can in no way not exist.
Our sense perceptions with its noticing of generation and destruction are in grievous error.
Instead of sense perception, Parmenides advocated logos as the means to Truth.
He has been called the discoverer of logic,     For this view, that That Which Is Not exists, can never predominate.
You must debar your thought from this way of search, nor let ordinary experience in its variety force you along this way, (namely, that of allowing) the eye, sightless as it is, and the ear, full of sound, and the tongue, to rule; but (you must) judge by means of the Reason ( Logos ) the much-contested proof which is expounded by me.
— B 7.1–8.2  Zeno of Elea , a pupil of Parmenides, had the idea of a standard argument pattern found in the method of proof known as reductio ad absurdum .
This is the technique of drawing an obviously false (that is, "absurd") conclusion from an assumption, thus demonstrating that the assumption is false.
Therefore, Zeno and his teacher are seen as the first to apply the art of logic.
Plato's dialogue Parmenides portrays Zeno as claiming to have written a book defending the monism of Parmenides by demonstrating the absurd consequence of assuming that there is plurality.
Zeno famously used this method to develop his paradoxes in his arguments against motion.
Such dialectic reasoning later became popular.
The members of this school were called "dialecticians" (from a Greek word meaning "to discuss").
Plato   Let no one ignorant of geometry enter here.
— Inscribed over the entrance to Plato's Academy.
Plato's Academy mosaic  None of the surviving works of the great fourth-century philosopher Plato (428–347 BC) include any formal logic,  but they include important contributions to the field of philosophical logic .
Plato raises three questions:  What is it that can properly be called true or false?
What is the nature of the connection between the assumptions of a valid argument and its conclusion?
What is the nature of definition?
The first question arises in the dialogue Theaetetus , where Plato identifies thought or opinion with talk or discourse ( logos ).
The second question is a result of Plato's theory of Forms .
Forms are not things in the ordinary sense, nor strictly ideas in the mind, but they correspond to what philosophers later called universals , namely an abstract entity common to each set of things that have the same name.
In both the Republic and the Sophist , Plato suggests that the necessary connection between the assumptions of a valid argument and its conclusion corresponds to a necessary connection between "forms".
The third question is about definition .
Many of Plato's dialogues concern the search for a definition of some important concept (justice, truth, the Good), and it is likely that Plato was impressed by the importance of definition in mathematics.
What underlies every definition is a Platonic Form, the common nature present in different particular things.
Thus, a definition reflects the ultimate object of understanding, and is the foundation of all valid inference.
This had a great influence on Plato's student Aristotle , in particular Aristotle's notion of the essence of a thing.
Aristotle   Main article: Term logic  Aristotle  The logic of Aristotle , and particularly his theory of the syllogism , has had an enormous influence in Western thought .
Aristotle was the first logician to attempt a systematic analysis of logical syntax , of noun (or term ), and of verb.
He was the first formal logician , in that he demonstrated the principles of reasoning by employing variables to show the underlying logical form of an argument.
He sought relations of dependence which characterize necessary inference, and distinguished the validity of these relations, from the truth of the premises.
He was the first to deal with the principles of contradiction and excluded middle in a systematic way.
Aristotle's logic was still influential in the Renaissance  The Organon   His logical works, called the Organon , are the earliest formal study of logic that have come down to modern times.
Though it is difficult to determine the dates, the probable order of writing of Aristotle's logical works is:  The Categories , a study of the ten kinds of primitive term.
The Topics (with an appendix called On Sophistical Refutations ), a discussion of dialectics.
On Interpretation , an analysis of simple categorical propositions into simple terms, negation, and signs of quantity.
The Prior Analytics , a formal analysis of what makes a syllogism (a valid argument, according to Aristotle).
The Posterior Analytics , a study of scientific demonstration, containing Aristotle's mature views on logic.
This diagram shows the contradictory relationships between categorical propositions in the square of opposition of Aristotelian logic .
These works are of outstanding importance in the history of logic.
In the Categories , he attempts to discern all the possible things to which a term can refer; this idea underpins his philosophical work Metaphysics , which itself had a profound influence on Western thought.
He also developed a theory of non-formal logic ( i.e., the theory of fallacies ), which is presented in Topics and Sophistical Refutations .
On Interpretation contains a comprehensive treatment of the notions of opposition and conversion; chapter 7 is at the origin of the square of opposition (or logical square); chapter 9 contains the beginning of modal logic .
The Prior Analytics contains his exposition of the "syllogism", where three important principles are applied for the first time in history: the use of variables, a purely formal treatment, and the use of an axiomatic system.
Stoics   Main article: Stoic logic  The other great school of Greek logic is that of the Stoics .
Stoic logic traces its roots back to the late 5th century BC philosopher Euclid of Megara , a pupil of Socrates and slightly older contemporary of Plato, probably following in the tradition of Parmenides and Zeno.
His pupils and successors were called " Megarians ", or "Eristics", and later the "Dialecticians".
The two most important dialecticians of the Megarian school were Diodorus Cronus and Philo , who were active in the late 4th century BC.
Chrysippus of Soli  The Stoics adopted the Megarian logic and systemized it.
The most important member of the school was Chrysippus (c.
278–c.
206 BC), who was its third head, and who formalized much of Stoic doctrine.
He is supposed to have written over 700 works, including at least 300 on logic, almost none of which survive.
Unlike with Aristotle, we have no complete works by the Megarians or the early Stoics, and have to rely mostly on accounts (sometimes hostile) by later sources, including prominently Diogenes Laërtius , Sextus Empiricus , Galen , Aulus Gellius , Alexander of Aphrodisias , and Cicero .
Three significant contributions of the Stoic school were (i) their account of modality , (ii) their theory of the Material conditional , and (iii) their account of meaning and truth .
Modality .
According to Aristotle, the Megarians of his day claimed there was no distinction between potentiality and actuality .
Diodorus Cronus defined the possible as that which either is or will be, the impossible as what will not be true, and the contingent as that which either is already, or will be false.
Diodorus is also famous for what is known as his Master argument , which states that each pair of the following 3 propositions contradicts the third proposition:  Everything that is past is true and necessary.
The impossible does not follow from the possible.
What neither is nor will be is possible.
Diodorus used the plausibility of the first two to prove that nothing is possible if it neither is nor will be true.
Chrysippus, by contrast, denied the second premise and said that the impossible could follow from the possible.
Conditional statements .
The first logicians to debate conditional statements were Diodorus and his pupil Philo of Megara.
Sextus Empiricus refers three times to a debate between Diodorus and Philo.
Philo regarded a conditional as true unless it has both a true antecedent and a false consequent .
Precisely, let T 0 and T 1 be true statements, and let F 0 and F 1 be false statements; then, according to Philo, each of the following conditionals is a true statement, because it is not the case that the consequent is false while the antecedent is true (it is not the case that a false statement is asserted to follow from a true statement):  If T 0 , then T 1  If F 0 , then T 0  If F 0 , then F 1  The following conditional does not meet this requirement, and is therefore a false statement according to Philo: If T 0 , then F 0  Indeed, Sextus says "According to , there are three ways in which a conditional may be true, and one in which it may be false."
Philo's criterion of truth is what would now be called a truth-functional definition of "if ...
then"; it is the definition used in modern logic .
In contrast, Diodorus allowed the validity of conditionals only when the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion.
A century later, the Stoic philosopher Chrysippus attacked the assumptions of both Philo and Diodorus.
Meaning and truth .
The most important and striking difference between Megarian-Stoic logic and Aristotelian logic is that Megarian-Stoic logic concerns propositions, not terms, and is thus closer to modern propositional logic .
The Stoics distinguished between utterance ( phone ), which may be noise, speech ( lexis ), which is articulate but which may be meaningless, and discourse ( logos ), which is meaningful utterance.
The most original part of their theory is the idea that what is expressed by a sentence, called a lekton , is something real; this corresponds to what is now called a proposition .
Sextus says that according to the Stoics, three things are linked together: that which signifies, that which is signified, and the object; for example, that which signifies is the word Dion , and that which is signified is what Greeks understand but barbarians do not, and the object is Dion himself.
Medieval logic   Logic in the Middle East   Main article: Logic in Islamic philosophy  See also: Avicennian logic  A text by Avicenna , founder of Avicennian logic  The works of Al-Kindi , Al-Farabi , Avicenna , Al-Ghazali , Averroes and other Muslim logicians were based on Aristotelian logic and were important in communicating the ideas of the ancient world to the medieval West.
Al-Farabi (Alfarabi) (873–950) was an Aristotelian logician who discussed the topics of future contingents , the number and relation of the categories, the relation between logic and grammar , and non-Aristotelian forms of inference .
Al-Farabi also considered the theories of conditional syllogisms and analogical inference , which were part of the Stoic tradition of logic rather than the Aristotelian.
Maimonides (1138-1204) wrote a Treatise on Logic (Arabic: Maqala Fi-Sinat Al-Mantiq ), referring to Al-Farabi as the "second master", the first being Aristotle.
Ibn Sina (Avicenna) (980–1037) was the founder of Avicennian logic , which replaced Aristotelian logic as the dominant system of logic in the Islamic world,  and also had an important influence on Western medieval writers such as Albertus Magnus .
Avicenna wrote on the hypothetical syllogism  and on the propositional calculus , which were both part of the Stoic logical tradition.
He developed an original "temporally modalized" syllogistic theory, involving temporal logic and modal logic .
He also made use of inductive logic , such as the methods of agreement, difference, and concomitant variation which are critical to the scientific method .
One of Avicenna's ideas had a particularly important influence on Western logicians such as William of Ockham : Avicenna's word for a meaning or notion ( ma'na ), was translated by the scholastic logicians as the Latin intentio ; in medieval logic and epistemology , this is a sign in the mind that naturally represents a thing.
This was crucial to the development of Ockham's conceptualism : A universal term ( e.g., "man") does not signify a thing existing in reality, but rather a sign in the mind ( intentio in intellectu ) which represents many things in reality; Ockham cites Avicenna's commentary on Metaphysics V in support of this view.
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (b.
1149) criticised Aristotle's " first figure " and formulated an early system of inductive logic, foreshadowing the system of inductive logic developed by John Stuart Mill (1806–1873).
Al-Razi's work was seen by later Islamic scholars as marking a new direction for Islamic logic, towards a Post-Avicennian logic .
This was further elaborated by his student Afdaladdîn al-Khûnajî (d.
1249), who developed a form of logic revolving around the subject matter of conceptions and assents .
In response to this tradition, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201–1274) began a tradition of Neo-Avicennian logic which remained faithful to Avicenna's work and existed as an alternative to the more dominant Post-Avicennian school over the following centuries.
The Illuminationist school was founded by Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155–1191), who developed the idea of "decisive necessity", which refers to the reduction of all modalities (necessity, possibility , contingency and impossibility ) to the single mode of necessity.
Ibn al-Nafis (1213–1288) wrote a book on Avicennian logic, which was a commentary of Avicenna's Al-Isharat ( The Signs ) and Al-Hidayah ( The Guidance ).
Ibn Taymiyyah (1263–1328), wrote the Ar-Radd 'ala al-Mantiqiyyin , where he argued against the usefulness, though not the validity, of the syllogism  and in favour of inductive reasoning .
Ibn Taymiyyah also argued against the certainty of syllogistic arguments and in favour of analogy ; his argument is that concepts founded on induction are themselves not certain but only probable, and thus a syllogism based on such concepts is no more certain than an argument based on analogy.
He further claimed that induction itself is founded on a process of analogy.
His model of analogical reasoning was based on that of juridical arguments.
This model of analogy has been used in the recent work of John F.
Sowa .
The Sharh al-takmil fi'l-mantiq written by Muhammad ibn Fayd Allah ibn Muhammad Amin al-Sharwani in the 15th century is the last major Arabic work on logic that has been studied.
However, "thousands upon thousands of pages" on logic were written between the 14th and 19th centuries, though only a fraction of the texts written during this period have been studied by historians, hence little is known about the original work on Islamic logic produced during this later period.
Logic in medieval Europe   Brito's questions on the Old Logic  "Medieval logic" (also known as "Scholastic logic") generally means the form of Aristotelian logic developed in medieval Europe throughout roughly the period 1200–1600.
For centuries after Stoic logic had been formulated, it was the dominant system of logic in the classical world.
When the study of logic resumed after the Dark Ages , the main source was the work of the Christian philosopher Boethius , who was familiar with some of Aristotle's logic, but almost none of the work of the Stoics.
Until the twelfth century, the only works of Aristotle available in the West were the Categories , On Interpretation , and Boethius's translation of the Isagoge of Porphyry (a commentary on the Categories).
These works were known as the "Old Logic" ( Logica Vetus or Ars Vetus ).
An important work in this tradition was the Logica Ingredientibus of Peter Abelard (1079–1142).
His direct influence was small,  but his influence through pupils such as John of Salisbury was great, and his method of applying rigorous logical analysis to theology shaped the way that theological criticism developed in the period that followed.
The proof for the principle of explosion , also known as the principle of Pseudo-Scotus, the law according to which any proposition can be proven from a contradiction (including its negation), was first given by the 12th century French logician William of Soissons .
By the early thirteenth century, the remaining works of Aristotle's Organon , including the Prior Analytics , Posterior Analytics , and the Sophistical Refutations (collectively known as the Logica Nova or "New Logic"), had been recovered in the West.
Logical work until then was mostly paraphrasis or commentary on the work of Aristotle.
The period from the middle of the thirteenth to the middle of the fourteenth century was one of significant developments in logic, particularly in three areas which were original, with little foundation in the Aristotelian tradition that came before.
These were:    The theory of supposition .
Supposition theory deals with the way that predicates ( e.g., 'man') range over a domain of individuals ( e.g., all men).
In the proposition 'every man is an animal', does the term 'man' range over or 'supposit for' men existing just in the present, or does the range include past and future men?
Can a term supposit for a non-existing individual?
Some medievalists have argued that this idea is a precursor of modern first-order logic .
"The theory of supposition with the associated theories of copulatio (sign-capacity of adjectival terms), ampliatio (widening of referential domain), and distributio constitute one of the most original achievements of Western medieval logic".
The theory of syncategoremata .
Syncategoremata are terms which are necessary for logic, but which, unlike categorematic terms, do not signify on their own behalf, but 'co-signify' with other words.
Examples of syncategoremata are 'and', 'not', 'every', 'if', and so on.
The theory of consequences .
A consequence is a hypothetical, conditional proposition: two propositions joined by the terms 'if ...
then'.
For example, 'if a man runs, then God exists' ( Si homo currit, Deus est ).
A fully developed theory of consequences is given in Book III of William of Ockham 's work Summa Logicae .
There, Ockham distinguishes between 'material' and 'formal' consequences, which are roughly equivalent to the modern material implication and logical implication respectively.
Similar accounts are given by Jean Buridan and Albert of Saxony .
The last great works in this tradition are the Logic of John Poinsot (1589–1644, known as John of St Thomas ), the Metaphysical Disputations of Francisco Suarez (1548–1617), and the Logica Demonstrativa of Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri (1667–1733).
Traditional logic   The textbook tradition   Dudley Fenner 's Art of Logic (1584)  Traditional logic generally means the textbook tradition that begins with Antoine Arnauld 's and Pierre Nicole 's Logic, or the Art of Thinking , better known as the Port-Royal Logic .
Published in 1662, it was the most influential work on logic after Aristotle until the nineteenth century.
The book presents a loosely Cartesian doctrine (that the proposition is a combining of ideas rather than terms, for example) within a framework that is broadly derived from Aristotelian and medieval term logic .
Between 1664 and 1700, there were eight editions, and the book had considerable influence after that.
The Port-Royal introduces the concepts of extension and intension .
The account of propositions that Locke gives in the Essay is essentially that of the Port-Royal:  "Verbal propositions, which are words,  the signs of our ideas, put together or separated in affirmative or negative sentences.
So that proposition consists in the putting together or separating these signs, according as the things which they stand for agree or disagree."
Dudley Fenner helped popularize Ramist logic, a reaction against Aristotle.
Another influential work was the Novum Organum by Francis Bacon , published in 1620.
The title translates as "new instrument".
This is a reference to Aristotle 's work known as the Organon .
In this work, Bacon rejects the syllogistic method of Aristotle in favor of an alternative procedure "which by slow and faithful toil gathers information from things and brings it into understanding".
This method is known as inductive reasoning , a method which starts from empirical observation and proceeds to lower axioms or propositions; from these lower axioms, more general ones can be induced.
For example, in finding the cause of a phenomenal nature such as heat, 3 lists should be constructed:  The presence list: a list of every situation where heat is found.
The absence list: a list of every situation that is similar to at least one of those of the presence list, except for the lack of heat.
The variability list: a list of every situation where heat can vary.
Then, the form nature (or cause) of heat may be defined as that which is common to every situation of the presence list, and which is lacking from every situation of the absence list, and which varies by degree in every situation of the variability list.
Other works in the textbook tradition include Isaac Watts 's Logick: Or, the Right Use of Reason (1725), Richard Whately 's Logic (1826), and John Stuart Mill 's A System of Logic (1843).
Although the latter was one of the last great works in the tradition, Mill's view that the foundations of logic lie in introspection  influenced the view that logic is best understood as a branch of psychology, a view which dominated the next fifty years of its development, especially in Germany.
Logic in Hegel's philosophy   Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel  G.W.F.
Hegel indicated the importance of logic to his philosophical system when he condensed his extensive Science of Logic into a shorter work published in 1817 as the first volume of his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences.
The "Shorter" or "Encyclopaedia" Logic , as it is often known, lays out a series of transitions which leads from the most empty and abstract of categories—Hegel begins with "Pure Being" and "Pure Nothing"—to the " Absolute ", the category which contains and resolves all the categories which preceded it.
Despite the title, Hegel's Logic is not really a contribution to the science of valid inference.
Rather than deriving conclusions about concepts through valid inference from premises, Hegel seeks to show that thinking about one concept compels thinking about another concept (one cannot, he argues, possess the concept of "Quality" without the concept of "Quantity"); this compulsion is, supposedly, not a matter of individual psychology, because it arises almost organically from the content of the concepts themselves.
His purpose is to show the rational structure of the "Absolute"—indeed of rationality itself.
The method by which thought is driven from one concept to its contrary, and then to further concepts, is known as the Hegelian dialectic .
Although Hegel's Logic has had little impact on mainstream logical studies, its influence can be seen elsewhere:  Carl von Prantl 's Geschichte der Logik im Abendland (1855–1867).
The work of the British Idealists , such as F.
H.
Bradley's Principles of Logic (1883).
The economic, political, and philosophical studies of Karl Marx , and in the various schools of Marxism .
Logic and psychology   Between the work of Mill and Frege stretched half a century during which logic was widely treated as a descriptive science, an empirical study of the structure of reasoning, and thus essentially as a branch of psychology .
The German psychologist Wilhelm Wundt , for example, discussed deriving "the logical from the psychological laws of thought", emphasizing that "psychological thinking is always the more comprehensive form of thinking."
This view was widespread among German philosophers of the period:  Theodor Lipps described logic as "a specific discipline of psychology".
Christoph von Sigwart understood logical necessity as grounded in the individual's compulsion to think in a certain way.
Benno Erdmann argued that "logical laws only hold within the limits of our thinking".
Such was the dominant view of logic in the years following Mill's work.
This psychological approach to logic was rejected by Gottlob Frege .
It was also subjected to an extended and destructive critique by Edmund Husserl in the first volume of his Logical Investigations (1900), an assault which has been described as "overwhelming".
Husserl argued forcefully that grounding logic in psychological observations implied that all logical truths remained unproven, and that skepticism and relativism were unavoidable consequences.
Such criticisms did not immediately extirpate what is called " psychologism ".
For example, the American philosopher Josiah Royce , while acknowledging the force of Husserl's critique, remained "unable to doubt" that progress in psychology would be accompanied by progress in logic, and vice versa.
Rise of modern logic   The period between the fourteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century had been largely one of decline and neglect, and is generally regarded as barren by historians of logic.
The revival of logic occurred in the mid-nineteenth century, at the beginning of a revolutionary period where the subject developed into a rigorous and formalistic discipline whose exemplar was the exact method of proof used in mathematics .
The development of the modern "symbolic" or "mathematical" logic during this period is the most significant in the 2000-year history of logic, and is arguably one of the most important and remarkable events in human intellectual history.
A number of features distinguish modern logic from the old Aristotelian or traditional logic, the most important of which are as follows:  Modern logic is fundamentally a calculus whose rules of operation are determined only by the shape and not by the meaning of the symbols it employs, as in mathematics.
Many logicians were impressed by the "success" of mathematics, in that there had been no prolonged dispute about any truly mathematical result.
C.
S.
Peirce noted  that even though a mistake in the evaluation of a definite integral by Laplace led to an error concerning the moon's orbit that persisted for nearly 50 years, the mistake, once spotted, was corrected without any serious dispute.
Peirce contrasted this with the disputation and uncertainty surrounding traditional logic, and especially reasoning in metaphysics .
He argued that a truly "exact" logic would depend upon mathematical, i.e., "diagrammatic" or "iconic" thought.
"Those who follow such methods will ...
escape all error except such as will be speedily corrected after it is once suspected".
Modern logic is also "constructive" rather than "abstractive"; i.e., rather than abstracting and formalising theorems derived from ordinary language (or from psychological intuitions about validity), it constructs theorems by formal methods, then looks for an interpretation in ordinary language.
It is entirely symbolic, meaning that even the logical constants (which the medieval logicians called " syncategoremata ") and the categoric terms are expressed in symbols.
Modern logic   See also: History of mathematical logic  The development of modern logic falls into roughly five periods:    The embryonic period from Leibniz to 1847, when the notion of a logical calculus was discussed and developed, particularly by Leibniz, but no schools were formed, and isolated periodic attempts were abandoned or went unnoticed.
The algebraic period from Boole 's Analysis to Schröder 's Vorlesungen .
In this period, there were more practitioners, and a greater continuity of development.
The logicist period from the Begriffsschrift of Frege to the Principia Mathematica of Russell and Whitehead .
The aim of the "logicist school" was to incorporate the logic of all mathematical and scientific discourse in a single unified system which, taking as a fundamental principle that all mathematical truths are logical, did not accept any non-logical terminology.
The major logicists were Frege , Russell , and the early Wittgenstein .
It culminates with the Principia , an important work which includes a thorough examination and attempted solution of the antinomies which had been an obstacle to earlier progress.
The metamathematical period from 1910 to the 1930s, which saw the development of metalogic , in the finitist system of Hilbert , and the non-finitist system of Löwenheim and Skolem , the combination of logic and metalogic in the work of Gödel and Tarski .
Gödel's incompleteness theorem of 1931 was one of the greatest achievements in the history of logic.
Later in the 1930s, Gödel developed the notion of set-theoretic constructibility .
The period after World War II , when mathematical logic branched into four inter-related but separate areas of research: model theory , proof theory , computability theory , and set theory , and its ideas and methods began to influence philosophy .
Embryonic period   Leibniz  The idea that inference could be represented by a purely mechanical process is found as early as Raymond Llull , who proposed a (somewhat eccentric) method of drawing conclusions by a system of concentric rings.
The work of logicians such as the Oxford Calculators  led to a method of using letters instead of writing out logical calculations ( calculationes ) in words, a method used, for instance, in the Logica magna by Paul of Venice .
Three hundred years after Llull, the English philosopher and logician Thomas Hobbes suggested that all logic and reasoning could be reduced to the mathematical operations of addition and subtraction.
The same idea is found in the work of Leibniz , who had read both Llull and Hobbes, and who argued that logic can be represented through a combinatorial process or calculus.
But, like Llull and Hobbes, he failed to develop a detailed or comprehensive system, and his work on this topic was not published until long after his death.
Leibniz says that ordinary languages are subject to "countless ambiguities" and are unsuited for a calculus, whose task is to expose mistakes in inference arising from the forms and structures of words;  hence, he proposed to identify an alphabet of human thought comprising fundamental concepts which could be composed to express complex ideas,  and create a calculus ratiocinator that would make all arguments "as tangible as those of the Mathematicians, so that we can find our error at a glance, and when there are disputes among persons, we can simply say: Let us calculate."
Gergonne (1816) said that reasoning does not have to be about objects about which one has perfectly clear ideas, because algebraic operations can be carried out without having any idea of the meaning of the symbols involved.
Bolzano anticipated a fundamental idea of modern proof theory when he defined logical consequence or "deducibility" in terms of variables:  Hence I say that propositions     M    {\displaystyle M}   ,     N    {\displaystyle N}   ,     O    {\displaystyle O}   ,...
are deducible from propositions     A    {\displaystyle A}   ,     B    {\displaystyle B}   ,     C    {\displaystyle C}   ,     D    {\displaystyle D}   ,...
with respect to variable parts     i    {\displaystyle i}   ,     j    {\displaystyle j}   ,..., if every class of ideas whose substitution for     i    {\displaystyle i}   ,     j    {\displaystyle j}   ,...
makes all of     A    {\displaystyle A}   ,     B    {\displaystyle B}   ,     C    {\displaystyle C}   ,     D    {\displaystyle D}   ,...
true, also makes all of     M    {\displaystyle M}   ,     N    {\displaystyle N}   ,     O    {\displaystyle O}   ,...
true.
Occasionally, since it is customary, I shall say that propositions     M    {\displaystyle M}   ,     N    {\displaystyle N}   ,     O    {\displaystyle O}   ,...
follow , or can be inferred or derived , from     A    {\displaystyle A}   ,     B    {\displaystyle B}   ,     C    {\displaystyle C}   ,     D    {\displaystyle D}   ,....
Propositions     A    {\displaystyle A}   ,     B    {\displaystyle B}   ,     C    {\displaystyle C}   ,     D    {\displaystyle D}   ,...
I shall call the premises ,     M    {\displaystyle M}   ,     N    {\displaystyle N}   ,     O    {\displaystyle O}   ,...
the conclusions.
This is now known as semantic validity .
Algebraic period   George Boole  Modern logic begins with what is known as the "algebraic school", originating with Boole and including Peirce , Jevons , Schröder , and Venn .
Their objective was to develop a calculus to formalise reasoning in the area of classes, propositions, and probabilities.
The school begins with Boole's seminal work Mathematical Analysis of Logic which appeared in 1847, although De Morgan (1847) is its immediate precursor.
The fundamental idea of Boole's system is that algebraic formulae can be used to express logical relations.
This idea occurred to Boole in his teenage years, working as an usher in a private school in Lincoln, Lincolnshire .
For example, let x and y stand for classes, let the symbol = signify that the classes have the same members, xy stand for the class containing all and only the members of x and y and so on.
Boole calls these elective symbols , i.e.
symbols which select certain objects for consideration.
An expression in which elective symbols are used is called an elective function , and an equation of which the members are elective functions, is an elective equation .
The theory of elective functions and their "development" is essentially the modern idea of truth-functions and their expression in disjunctive normal form .
Boole's system admits of two interpretations, in class logic, and propositional logic.
Boole distinguished between "primary propositions" which are the subject of syllogistic theory, and "secondary propositions", which are the subject of propositional logic, and showed how under different "interpretations" the same algebraic system could represent both.
An example of a primary proposition is "All inhabitants are either Europeans or Asiatics."
An example of a secondary proposition is "Either all inhabitants are Europeans or they are all Asiatics."
These are easily distinguished in modern predicate  logic, where it is also possible to show that the first follows from the second, but it is a significant disadvantage that there is no way of representing this in the Boolean system.
In his Symbolic Logic (1881), John Venn used diagrams of overlapping areas to express Boolean relations between classes or truth-conditions of propositions.
In 1869 Jevons realised that Boole's methods could be mechanised, and constructed a "logical machine" which he showed to the Royal Society the following year.
In 1885 Allan Marquand proposed an electrical version of the machine that is still extant ( picture at the Firestone Library ).
Charles Sanders Peirce  The defects in Boole's system (such as the use of the letter v for existential propositions) were all remedied by his followers.
Jevons published Pure Logic, or the Logic of Quality apart from Quantity in 1864, where he suggested a symbol to signify exclusive or , which allowed Boole's system to be greatly simplified.
This was usefully exploited by Schröder when he set out theorems in parallel columns in his Vorlesungen (1890–1905).
Peirce (1880) showed how all the Boolean elective functions could be expressed by the use of a single primitive binary operation, " neither ...
nor ...
" and equally well " not both ...
and ...
",  however, like many of Peirce's innovations, this remained unknown or unnoticed until Sheffer rediscovered it in 1913.
Boole's early work also lacks the idea of the logical sum which originates in Peirce (1867), Schröder (1877) and Jevons (1890),  and the concept of inclusion , first suggested by Gergonne (1816) and clearly articulated by Peirce (1870).
Boolean multiples  The success of Boole's algebraic system suggested that all logic must be capable of algebraic representation, and there were attempts to express a logic of relations in such form, of which the most ambitious was Schröder's monumental Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik ("Lectures on the Algebra of Logic", vol iii 1895), although the original idea was again anticipated by Peirce.
Boole's unwavering acceptance of Aristotle's logic is emphasized by the historian of logic John Corcoran in an accessible introduction to Laws of Thought  Corcoran also wrote a point-by-point comparison of Prior Analytics and Laws of Thought .
According to Corcoran, Boole fully accepted and endorsed Aristotle's logic.
Boole's goals were "to go under, over, and beyond" Aristotle's logic by 1) providing it with mathematical foundations involving equations, 2) extending the class of problems it could treat — from assessing validity to solving equations — and 3) expanding the range of applications it could handle — e.g.
from propositions having only two terms to those having arbitrarily many.
More specifically, Boole agreed with what Aristotle said; Boole's 'disagreements', if they might be called that, concern what Aristotle did not say.
First, in the realm of foundations, Boole reduced the four propositional forms of Aristotelian logic to formulas in the form of equations — by itself a revolutionary idea.
Second, in the realm of logic's problems, Boole's addition of equation solving to logic — another revolutionary idea — involved Boole's doctrine that Aristotle's rules of inference (the "perfect syllogisms") must be supplemented by rules for equation solving.
Third, in the realm of applications, Boole's system could handle multi-term propositions and arguments whereas Aristotle could handle only two-termed subject-predicate propositions and arguments.
For example, Aristotle's system could not deduce "No quadrangle that is a square is a rectangle that is a rhombus" from "No square that is a quadrangle is a rhombus that is a rectangle" or from "No rhombus that is a rectangle is a square that is a quadrangle".
Logicist period   Gottlob Frege.
After Boole, the next great advances were made by the German mathematician Gottlob Frege .
Frege's objective was the program of Logicism , i.e.
demonstrating that arithmetic is identical with logic.
Frege went much further than any of his predecessors in his rigorous and formal approach to logic, and his calculus or Begriffsschrift is important.
Frege also tried to show that the concept of number can be defined by purely logical means, so that (if he was right) logic includes arithmetic and all branches of mathematics that are reducible to arithmetic.
He was not the first writer to suggest this.
In his pioneering work Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (The Foundations of Arithmetic), sections 15–17, he acknowledges the efforts of Leibniz, J.
S.
Mill as well as Jevons, citing the latter's claim that "algebra is a highly developed logic, and number but logical discrimination."
Frege's first work, the Begriffsschrift ("concept script") is a rigorously axiomatised system of propositional logic, relying on just two connectives (negational and conditional), two rules of inference ( modus ponens and substitution), and six axioms.
Frege referred to the "completeness" of this system, but was unable to prove this.
The most significant innovation, however, was his explanation of the quantifier in terms of mathematical functions.
Traditional logic regards the sentence "Caesar is a man" as of fundamentally the same form as "all men are mortal."
Sentences with a proper name subject were regarded as universal in character, interpretable as "every Caesar is a man".
At the outset Frege abandons the traditional "concepts subject and predicate ", replacing them with argument and function respectively, which he believes "will stand the test of time.
It is easy to see how regarding a content as a function of an argument leads to the formation of concepts.
Furthermore, the demonstration of the connection between the meanings of the words if, and, not, or, there is, some, all, and so forth, deserves attention".
Frege argued that the quantifier expression "all men" does not have the same logical or semantic form as "all men", and that the universal proposition "every A is B" is a complex proposition involving two functions , namely ' – is A' and ' – is B' such that whatever satisfies the first, also satisfies the second.
In modern notation, this would be expressed as      ∀   x    (    A  (  x  )  →  B  (  x  )    )      {\displaystyle \forall \;x{\big (}A(x)\rightarrow B(x){\big )}}    In English, "for all x, if Ax then Bx".
Thus only singular propositions are of subject-predicate form, and they are irreducibly singular, i.e.
not reducible to a general proposition.
Universal and particular propositions, by contrast, are not of simple subject-predicate form at all.
If "all mammals" were the logical subject of the sentence "all mammals are land-dwellers", then to negate the whole sentence we would have to negate the predicate to give "all mammals are not land-dwellers".
But this is not the case.
This functional analysis of ordinary-language sentences later had a great impact on philosophy and linguistics .
This means that in Frege's calculus, Boole's "primary" propositions can be represented in a different way from "secondary" propositions.
"All inhabitants are either men or women" is  Frege 's "Concept Script"      ∀   x    (    I  (  x  )  →    (    M  (  x  )  ∨  W  (  x  )    )      )      {\displaystyle \forall \;x{\Big (}I(x)\rightarrow {\big (}M(x)\lor W(x){\big )}{\Big )}}    whereas "All the inhabitants are men or all the inhabitants are women" is      ∀   x    (    I  (  x  )  →  M  (  x  )    )    ∨  ∀   x    (    I  (  x  )  →  W  (  x  )    )      {\displaystyle \forall \;x{\big (}I(x)\rightarrow M(x){\big )}\lor \forall \;x{\big (}I(x)\rightarrow W(x){\big )}}    As Frege remarked in a critique of Boole's calculus:  "The real difference is that I avoid  division into two parts ...
and give a homogeneous presentation of the lot.
In Boole the two parts run alongside one another, so that one is like the mirror image of the other, but for that very reason stands in no organic relation to it'   As well as providing a unified and comprehensive system of logic, Frege's calculus also resolved the ancient problem of multiple generality .
The ambiguity of "every girl kissed a boy" is difficult to express in traditional logic, but Frege's logic resolves this through the different scope of the quantifiers.
Thus      ∀   x    (    G  (  x  )  →  ∃   y    (    B  (  y  )  ∧  K  (  x  ,  y  )    )      )      {\displaystyle \forall \;x{\Big (}G(x)\rightarrow \exists \;y{\big (}B(y)\land K(x,y){\big )}{\Big )}}    Peano  means that to every girl there corresponds some boy (any one will do) who the girl kissed.
But      ∃   x    (    B  (  x  )  ∧  ∀   y    (    G  (  y  )  →  K  (  y  ,  x  )    )      )      {\displaystyle \exists \;x{\Big (}B(x)\land \forall \;y{\big (}G(y)\rightarrow K(y,x){\big )}{\Big )}}    means that there is some particular boy whom every girl kissed.
Without this device, the project of logicism would have been doubtful or impossible.
Using it, Frege provided a definition of the ancestral relation , of the many-to-one relation , and of mathematical induction .
Ernst Zermelo  This period overlaps with the work of what is known as the "mathematical school", which included Dedekind , Pasch , Peano , Hilbert , Zermelo , Huntington , Veblen and Heyting .
Their objective was the axiomatisation of branches of mathematics like geometry, arithmetic, analysis and set theory.
Most notable was Hilbert's Program , which sought to ground all of mathematics to a finite set of axioms, proving its consistency by "finitistic" means and providing a procedure which would decide the truth or falsity of any mathematical statement.
The standard axiomatization of the natural numbers is named the Peano axioms eponymously.
Peano maintained a clear distinction between mathematical and logical symbols.
While unaware of Frege's work, he independently recreated his logical apparatus based on the work of Boole and Schröder.
The logicist project received a near-fatal setback with the discovery of a paradox in 1901 by Bertrand Russell .
This proved Frege's naive set theory led to a contradiction.
Frege's theory contained the axiom that for any formal criterion, there is a set of all objects that meet the criterion.
Russell showed that a set containing exactly the sets that are not members of themselves would contradict its own definition (if it is not a member of itself, it is a member of itself, and if it is a member of itself, it is not).
This contradiction is now known as Russell's paradox .
One important method of resolving this paradox was proposed by Ernst Zermelo .
Zermelo set theory was the first axiomatic set theory .
It was developed into the now-canonical Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF).
Russell's paradox symbolically is as follows:       Let   R  =  {  x  ∣  x  ∉  x  }   , then   R  ∈  R   ⟺   R  ∉  R    {\displaystyle {\text{Let }}R=\{x\mid x\not \in x\}{\text{, then }}R\in R\iff R\not \in R}    The monumental Principia Mathematica , a three-volume work on the foundations of mathematics , written by Russell and Alfred North Whitehead and published 1910–1913 also included an attempt to resolve the paradox, by means of an elaborate system of types : a set of elements is of a different type than is each of its elements (set is not the element; one element is not the set) and one cannot speak of the " set of all sets ".
The Principia was an attempt to derive all mathematical truths from a well-defined set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic .
Metamathematical period   Kurt Gödel  The names of Gödel and Tarski dominate the 1930s,  a crucial period in the development of metamathematics – the study of mathematics using mathematical methods to produce metatheories , or mathematical theories about other mathematical theories.
Early investigations into metamathematics had been driven by Hilbert's program.
Work on metamathematics culminated in the work of Gödel, who in 1929 showed that a given first-order sentence is deducible if and only if it is logically valid – i.e.
it is true in every structure for its language.
This is known as Gödel's completeness theorem .
A year later, he proved two important theorems, which showed Hibert's program to be unattainable in its original form.
The first is that no consistent system of axioms whose theorems can be listed by an effective procedure such as an algorithm or computer program is capable of proving all facts about the natural numbers .
For any such system, there will always be statements about the natural numbers that are true, but that are unprovable within the system.
The second is that if such a system is also capable of proving certain basic facts about the natural numbers, then the system cannot prove the consistency of the system itself.
These two results are known as Gödel's incompleteness theorems , or simply Gödel's Theorem .
Later in the decade, Gödel developed the concept of set-theoretic constructibility , as part of his proof that the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis are consistent with Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory .
In proof theory , Gerhard Gentzen developed natural deduction and the sequent calculus .
The former attempts to model logical reasoning as it 'naturally' occurs in practice and is most easily applied to intuitionistic logic , while the latter was devised to clarify the derivation of logical proofs in any formal system.
Since Gentzen's work, natural deduction and sequent calculi have been widely applied in the fields of proof theory, mathematical logic and computer science.
Gentzen also proved normalization and cut-elimination theorems for intuitionistic and classical logic which could be used to reduce logical proofs to a normal form.
Alfred Tarski  Alfred Tarski , a pupil of Łukasiewicz , is best known for his definition of truth and logical consequence , and the semantic concept of logical satisfaction .
In 1933, he published (in Polish) The concept of truth in formalized languages , in which he proposed his semantic theory of truth : a sentence such as "snow is white" is true if and only if snow is white.
Tarski's theory separated the metalanguage , which makes the statement about truth, from the object language, which contains the sentence whose truth is being asserted, and gave a correspondence (the T-schema ) between phrases in the object language and elements of an interpretation .
Tarski's approach to the difficult idea of explaining truth has been enduringly influential in logic and philosophy, especially in the development of model theory .
Tarski also produced important work on the methodology of deductive systems, and on fundamental principles such as completeness , decidability , consistency and definability .
According to Anita Feferman, Tarski "changed the face of logic in the twentieth century".
Alonzo Church and Alan Turing proposed formal models of computability, giving independent negative solutions to Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem in 1936 and 1937, respectively.
The Entscheidungsproblem asked for a procedure that, given any formal mathematical statement, would algorithmically determine whether the statement is true.
Church and Turing proved there is no such procedure; Turing's paper introduced the halting problem as a key example of a mathematical problem without an algorithmic solution.
Church's system for computation developed into the modern λ-calculus , while the Turing machine became a standard model for a general-purpose computing device.
It was soon shown that many other proposed models of computation were equivalent in power to those proposed by Church and Turing.
These results led to the Church–Turing thesis that any deterministic algorithm that can be carried out by a human can be carried out by a Turing machine.
Church proved additional undecidability results, showing that both Peano arithmetic and first-order logic are undecidable .
Later work by Emil Post and Stephen Cole Kleene in the 1940s extended the scope of computability theory and introduced the concept of degrees of unsolvability .
The results of the first few decades of the twentieth century also had an impact upon analytic philosophy and philosophical logic , particularly from the 1950s onwards, in subjects such as modal logic , temporal logic , deontic logic , and relevance logic .
Logic after WWII   Saul Kripke  After World War II, mathematical logic branched into four inter-related but separate areas of research: model theory , proof theory , computability theory , and set theory .
In set theory, the method of forcing revolutionized the field by providing a robust method for constructing models and obtaining independence results.
Paul Cohen introduced this method in 1963 to prove the independence of the continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice from Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory .
His technique, which was simplified and extended soon after its introduction, has since been applied to many other problems in all areas of mathematical logic.
Computability theory had its roots in the work of Turing, Church, Kleene, and Post in the 1930s and 40s.
It developed into a study of abstract computability, which became known as recursion theory .
The priority method , discovered independently by Albert Muchnik and Richard Friedberg in the 1950s, led to major advances in the understanding of the degrees of unsolvability and related structures.
Research into higher-order computability theory demonstrated its connections to set theory.
The fields of constructive analysis and computable analysis were developed to study the effective content of classical mathematical theorems; these in turn inspired the program of reverse mathematics .
A separate branch of computability theory, computational complexity theory , was also characterized in logical terms as a result of investigations into descriptive complexity .
Model theory applies the methods of mathematical logic to study models of particular mathematical theories.
Alfred Tarski published much pioneering work in the field, which is named after a series of papers he published under the title Contributions to the theory of models .
In the 1960s, Abraham Robinson used model-theoretic techniques to develop calculus and analysis based on infinitesimals , a problem that first had been proposed by Leibniz.
In proof theory, the relationship between classical mathematics and intuitionistic mathematics was clarified via tools such as the realizability method invented by Georg Kreisel and Gödel's Dialectica interpretation .
This work inspired the contemporary area of proof mining .
The Curry–Howard correspondence emerged as a deep analogy between logic and computation, including a correspondence between systems of natural deduction and typed lambda calculi used in computer science.
As a result, research into this class of formal systems began to address both logical and computational aspects; this area of research came to be known as modern type theory.
Advances were also made in ordinal analysis and the study of independence results in arithmetic such as the Paris–Harrington theorem .
This was also a period, particularly in the 1950s and afterwards, when the ideas of mathematical logic begin to influence philosophical thinking.
For example, tense logic is a formalised system for representing, and reasoning about, propositions qualified in terms of time.
The philosopher Arthur Prior played a significant role in its development in the 1960s.
Modal logics extend the scope of formal logic to include the elements of modality (for example, possibility and necessity ).
The ideas of Saul Kripke , particularly about possible worlds , and the formal system now called Kripke semantics have had a profound impact on analytic philosophy .
His best known and most influential work is Naming and Necessity (1980).
Deontic logics are closely related to modal logics: they attempt to capture the logical features of obligation , permission and related concepts.
Although some basic novelties syncretizing mathematical and philosophical logic were shown by Bolzano in the early 1800s, it was Ernst Mally , a pupil of Alexius Meinong , who was to propose the first formal deontic system in his Grundgesetze des Sollens , based on the syntax of Whitehead's and Russell's propositional calculus .
Another logical system founded after World War II was fuzzy logic by Azerbaijani mathematician Lotfi Asker Zadeh in 1965.
Branch of mathematics  For other uses, see Geometry (disambiguation) .
Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane  Outline History ( Timeline )  Branches  Euclidean  Non-Euclidean  Elliptic  Spherical  Hyperbolic  Non-Archimedean geometry  Projective  Affine  Synthetic  Analytic  Algebraic  Arithmetic  Diophantine  Differential  Riemannian  Symplectic  Discrete differential  Complex  Finite  Discrete/Combinatorial  Digital  Convex  Computational  Fractal  Incidence  Noncommutative geometry  Noncommutative algebraic geometry   Concepts Features Dimension  Straightedge and compass constructions  Angle  Curve  Diagonal  Orthogonality ( Perpendicular )  Parallel  Vertex  Congruence  Similarity  Symmetry   Zero-dimensional  Point   One-dimensional  Line  segment  ray  Length   Two-dimensional  Plane  Area  Polygon   Triangle  Altitude  Hypotenuse  Pythagorean theorem   Parallelogram  Square  Rectangle  Rhombus  Rhomboid   Quadrilateral  Trapezoid  Kite   Circle  Diameter  Circumference  Area    Three-dimensional  Volume  Cube  cuboid  Cylinder  Dodecahedron  Icosahedron  Octahedron  Pyramid  Platonic Solid  Sphere  Tetrahedron   Four - / other-dimensional  Tesseract  Hypersphere   Geometers  by name  Aida  Aryabhata  Ahmes  Alhazen  Apollonius  Archimedes  Atiyah  Baudhayana  Bolyai  Brahmagupta  Cartan  Coxeter  Descartes  Euclid  Euler  Gauss  Gromov  Hilbert  Huygens  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Kātyāyana  Khayyám  Klein  Lobachevsky  Manava  Minkowski  Minggatu  Pascal  Pythagoras  Parameshvara  Poincaré  Riemann  Sakabe  Sijzi  al-Tusi  Veblen  Virasena  Yang Hui  al-Yasamin  Zhang  List of geometers   by period  BCE  Ahmes  Baudhayana  Manava  Pythagoras  Euclid  Archimedes  Apollonius  1–1400s  Zhang  Kātyāyana  Aryabhata  Brahmagupta  Virasena  Alhazen  Sijzi  Khayyám  al-Yasamin  al-Tusi  Yang Hui  Parameshvara  1400s–1700s  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Descartes  Pascal  Huygens  Minggatu  Euler  Sakabe  Aida  1700s–1900s  Gauss  Lobachevsky  Bolyai  Riemann  Klein  Poincaré  Hilbert  Minkowski  Cartan  Veblen  Coxeter  Present day  Atiyah  Gromov   v t e  Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Geometry (from Ancient Greek   γεωμετρία ( geōmetría ) 'land measurement'; from  γῆ ( gê ) 'earth, land', and  μέτρον ( métron ) 'a measure')  is a branch of mathematics concerned with properties of space such as the distance, shape, size, and relative position of figures.
Geometry is, along with arithmetic , one of the oldest branches of mathematics.
A mathematician who works in the field of geometry is called a geometer .
Until the 19th century, geometry was almost exclusively devoted to Euclidean geometry ,  which includes the notions of point , line , plane , distance , angle , surface , and curve , as fundamental concepts.
Originally developed to model the physical world, geometry has applications in almost all sciences , and also in art , architecture , and other activities that are related to graphics .
Geometry also has applications in areas of mathematics that are apparently unrelated.
For example, methods of algebraic geometry are fundamental in Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem , a problem that was stated in terms of elementary arithmetic , and remained unsolved for several centuries.
During the 19th century several discoveries enlarged dramatically the scope of geometry.
One of the oldest such discoveries is Carl Friedrich Gauss ' Theorema Egregium ("remarkable theorem") that asserts roughly that the Gaussian curvature of a surface is independent from any specific embedding in a Euclidean space .
This implies that surfaces can be studied intrinsically , that is, as stand-alone spaces, and has been expanded into the theory of manifolds and Riemannian geometry .
Later in the 19th century, it appeared that geometries without the parallel postulate ( non-Euclidean geometries ) can be developed without introducing any contradiction.
The geometry that underlies general relativity is a famous application of non-Euclidean geometry.
Since the late 19th century, the scope of geometry has been greatly expanded, and the field has been split in many subfields that depend on the underlying methods— differential geometry , algebraic geometry , computational geometry , algebraic topology , discrete geometry (also known as combinatorial geometry ), etc.—or on the properties of Euclidean spaces that are disregarded— projective geometry that consider only alignment of points but not distance and parallelism, affine geometry that omits the concept of angle and distance, finite geometry that omits continuity , and others.
This enlargement of the scope of geometry led to a change of meaning of the word "space", which originally referred to the three-dimensional space of the physical world and its model provided by Euclidean geometry; presently a geometric space , or simply a space is a mathematical structure on which some geometry is defined.
History  Main article: History of geometry  A European and an Arab practicing geometry in the 15th century  The earliest recorded beginnings of geometry can be traced to ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt in the 2nd millennium BC.
Early geometry was a collection of empirically discovered principles concerning lengths, angles, areas, and volumes, which were developed to meet some practical need in surveying , construction , astronomy , and various crafts.
The earliest known texts on geometry are the Egyptian  Rhind Papyrus (2000–1800 BC) and Moscow Papyrus ( c.
1890 BC ), and the Babylonian clay tablets , such as Plimpton 322 (1900 BC).
For example, the Moscow Papyrus gives a formula for calculating the volume of a truncated pyramid, or frustum .
Later clay tablets (350–50 BC) demonstrate that Babylonian astronomers implemented trapezoid procedures for computing Jupiter's position and motion within time-velocity space.
These geometric procedures anticipated the Oxford Calculators , including the mean speed theorem , by 14 centuries.
South of Egypt the ancient Nubians established a system of geometry including early versions of sun clocks.
In the 7th century BC, the Greek mathematician Thales of Miletus used geometry to solve problems such as calculating the height of pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore.
He is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales's theorem .
Pythagoras established the Pythagorean School , which is credited with the first proof of the Pythagorean theorem ,  though the statement of the theorem has a long history.
Eudoxus (408– c.
355 BC ) developed the method of exhaustion , which allowed the calculation of areas and volumes of curvilinear figures,  as well as a theory of ratios that avoided the problem of incommensurable magnitudes , which enabled subsequent geometers to make significant advances.
Around 300 BC, geometry was revolutionized by Euclid, whose Elements , widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time,  introduced mathematical rigor through the axiomatic method and is the earliest example of the format still used in mathematics today, that of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof.
Although most of the contents of the Elements were already known, Euclid arranged them into a single, coherent logical framework.
The Elements was known to all educated people in the West until the middle of the 20th century and its contents are still taught in geometry classes today.
Archimedes ( c.
287–212 BC ) of Syracuse, Italy used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series , and gave remarkably accurate approximations of pi .
He also studied the spiral bearing his name and obtained formulas for the volumes of surfaces of revolution .
Woman teaching geometry .
Illustration at the beginning of a medieval translation of Euclid's Elements , ( c.
1310 ).
Indian mathematicians also made many important contributions in geometry.
The Shatapatha Brahmana (3rd century BC) contains rules for ritual geometric constructions that are similar to the Sulba Sutras .
According to ( Hayashi 2005 , p.
363), the Śulba Sūtras contain "the earliest extant verbal expression of the Pythagorean Theorem in the world, although it had already been known to the Old Babylonians.
They contain lists of Pythagorean triples ,  which are particular cases of Diophantine equations .
In the Bakhshali manuscript , there are a handful of geometric problems (including problems about volumes of irregular solids).
The Bakhshali manuscript also "employs a decimal place value system with a dot for zero."
Aryabhata 's Aryabhatiya (499) includes the computation of areas and volumes.
Brahmagupta wrote his astronomical work Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta in 628.
Chapter 12, containing 66 Sanskrit verses, was divided into two sections: "basic operations" (including cube roots, fractions, ratio and proportion, and barter) and "practical mathematics" (including mixture, mathematical series, plane figures, stacking bricks, sawing of timber, and piling of grain).
In the latter section, he stated his famous theorem on the diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral .
Chapter 12 also included a formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral (a generalization of Heron's formula ), as well as a complete description of rational triangles ( i.e.
triangles with rational sides and rational areas).
In the Middle Ages , mathematics in medieval Islam contributed to the development of geometry, especially algebraic geometry .
Al-Mahani (b.
853) conceived the idea of reducing geometrical problems such as duplicating the cube to problems in algebra.
Thābit ibn Qurra (known as Thebit in Latin ) (836–901) dealt with arithmetic operations applied to ratios of geometrical quantities, and contributed to the development of analytic geometry .
Omar Khayyam (1048–1131) found geometric solutions to cubic equations .
The theorems of Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen), Omar Khayyam and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi on quadrilaterals , including the Lambert quadrilateral and Saccheri quadrilateral , were part of a line of research on the parallel postulate continued by later European geometers, including Vitello ( c.
1230 – c.
1314 ), Gersonides (1288–1344), Alfonso, John Wallis , and Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri , that by the 19th century led to the discovery of hyperbolic geometry .
In the early 17th century, there were two important developments in geometry.
The first was the creation of analytic geometry, or geometry with coordinates and equations , by René Descartes (1596–1650) and Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665).
This was a necessary precursor to the development of calculus and a precise quantitative science of physics .
The second geometric development of this period was the systematic study of projective geometry by Girard Desargues (1591–1661).
Projective geometry studies properties of shapes which are unchanged under projections and sections , especially as they relate to artistic perspective .
Two developments in geometry in the 19th century changed the way it had been studied previously.
These were the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky, János Bolyai and Carl Friedrich Gauss and of the formulation of symmetry as the central consideration in the Erlangen programme of Felix Klein (which generalized the Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries).
Two of the master geometers of the time were Bernhard Riemann (1826–1866), working primarily with tools from mathematical analysis , and introducing the Riemann surface , and Henri Poincaré , the founder of algebraic topology and the geometric theory of dynamical systems .
As a consequence of these major changes in the conception of geometry, the concept of " space " became something rich and varied, and the natural background for theories as different as complex analysis and classical mechanics .
Main concepts  The following are some of the most important concepts in geometry.
Axioms  An illustration of Euclid's parallel postulate  See also: Euclidean geometry and Axiom  Euclid took an abstract approach to geometry in his Elements ,  one of the most influential books ever written.
Euclid introduced certain axioms , or postulates , expressing primary or self-evident properties of points, lines, and planes.
He proceeded to rigorously deduce other properties by mathematical reasoning.
The characteristic feature of Euclid's approach to geometry was its rigor, and it has come to be known as axiomatic or synthetic geometry.
At the start of the 19th century, the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky (1792–1856), János Bolyai (1802–1860), Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and others  led to a revival of interest in this discipline, and in the 20th century, David Hilbert (1862–1943) employed axiomatic reasoning in an attempt to provide a modern foundation of geometry.
Objects  Points  Main article: Point (geometry)  Points are generally considered fundamental objects for building geometry.
They may be defined by the properties that they must have, as in Euclid's definition as "that which has no part",  or in synthetic geometry .
In modern mathematics, they are generally defined as elements of a set called space , which is itself axiomatically defined.
With these modern definitions, every geometric shape is defined as a set of points; this is not the case in synthetic geometry, where a line is another fundamental object that is not viewed as the set of the points through which it passes.
However, there are modern geometries in which points are not primitive objects, or even without points.
One of the oldest such geometries is Whitehead's point-free geometry , formulated by Alfred North Whitehead in 1919–1920.
Lines  Main article: Line (geometry)  Euclid described a line as "breadthless length" which "lies equally with respect to the points on itself".
In modern mathematics, given the multitude of geometries, the concept of a line is closely tied to the way the geometry is described.
For instance, in analytic geometry , a line in the plane is often defined as the set of points whose coordinates satisfy a given linear equation ,  but in a more abstract setting, such as incidence geometry , a line may be an independent object, distinct from the set of points which lie on it.
In differential geometry, a geodesic is a generalization of the notion of a line to curved spaces .
Planes  Main article: Euclidean plane  In Euclidean geometry a plane is a flat, two-dimensional surface that extends infinitely;  the definitions for other types of geometries are generalizations of that.
Planes are used in many areas of geometry.
For instance, planes can be studied as a topological surface without reference to distances or angles;  it can be studied as an affine space , where collinearity and ratios can be studied but not distances;  it can be studied as the complex plane using techniques of complex analysis ;  and so on.
Angles  Main article: Angle  Euclid defines a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in a plane, of two lines which meet each other, and do not lie straight with respect to each other.
In modern terms, an angle is the figure formed by two rays , called the sides of the angle, sharing a common endpoint, called the vertex of the angle.
Acute (a), obtuse (b), and straight (c) angles.
The acute and obtuse angles are also known as oblique angles.
In Euclidean geometry , angles are used to study polygons and triangles , as well as forming an object of study in their own right.
The study of the angles of a triangle or of angles in a unit circle forms the basis of trigonometry .
In differential geometry and calculus , the angles between plane curves or space curves or surfaces can be calculated using the derivative .
Curves  Main article: Curve (geometry)  A curve is a 1-dimensional object that may be straight (like a line) or not; curves in 2-dimensional space are called plane curves and those in 3-dimensional space are called space curves .
In topology, a curve is defined by a function from an interval of the real numbers to another space.
In differential geometry, the same definition is used, but the defining function is required to be differentiable  Algebraic geometry studies algebraic curves , which are defined as algebraic varieties of dimension one.
Surfaces  Main article: Surface (mathematics)  A sphere is a surface that can be defined parametrically (by x = r sin θ cos φ ,  y = r sin θ sin φ ,  z = r cos θ ) or implicitly (by x 2 + y 2 + z 2 − r 2 = 0 ).
A surface is a two-dimensional object, such as a sphere or paraboloid.
In differential geometry  and topology ,  surfaces are described by two-dimensional 'patches' (or neighborhoods ) that are assembled by diffeomorphisms or homeomorphisms , respectively.
In algebraic geometry, surfaces are described by polynomial equations .
Solids  Main article: Solid geometry  In Euclidean space , a ball is the volume bounded by a sphere.
A solid is a three-dimensional object bounded by a closed surface; for example, a ball is the volume bounded by a sphere.
Manifolds  Main article: Manifold  A manifold is a generalization of the concepts of curve and surface.
In topology , a manifold is a topological space where every point has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to Euclidean space.
In differential geometry , a differentiable manifold is a space where each neighborhood is diffeomorphic to Euclidean space.
Manifolds are used extensively in physics, including in general relativity and string theory .
Measures: length, area, and volume  Main articles: Length , Area , and Volume  See also: Area § List of formulas , and Volume § Volume formulas  Length , area , and volume describe the size or extent of an object in one dimension, two dimension, and three dimensions respectively.
In Euclidean geometry and analytic geometry , the length of a line segment can often be calculated by the Pythagorean theorem .
Area and volume can be defined as fundamental quantities separate from length, or they can be described and calculated in terms of lengths in a plane or 3-dimensional space.
Mathematicians have found many explicit formulas for area and formulas for volume of various geometric objects.
In calculus , area and volume can be defined in terms of integrals , such as the Riemann integral  or the Lebesgue integral .
Other geometrical measures include the angular measure , curvature , compactness measures .
Metrics and measures  Main articles: Metric (mathematics) and Measure (mathematics)  Visual checking of the Pythagorean theorem for the (3, 4, 5) triangle as in the Zhoubi Suanjing 500–200 BC.
The Pythagorean theorem is a consequence of the Euclidean metric .
The concept of length or distance can be generalized, leading to the idea of metrics .
For instance, the Euclidean metric measures the distance between points in the Euclidean plane , while the hyperbolic metric measures the distance in the hyperbolic plane .
Other important examples of metrics include the Lorentz metric of special relativity and the semi- Riemannian metrics of general relativity .
In a different direction, the concepts of length, area and volume are extended by measure theory , which studies methods of assigning a size or measure to sets , where the measures follow rules similar to those of classical area and volume.
Congruence and similarity  Main articles: Congruence (geometry) and Similarity (geometry)  Congruence and similarity are concepts that describe when two shapes have similar characteristics.
In Euclidean geometry, similarity is used to describe objects that have the same shape, while congruence is used to describe objects that are the same in both size and shape.
Hilbert , in his work on creating a more rigorous foundation for geometry, treated congruence as an undefined term whose properties are defined by axioms .
Congruence and similarity are generalized in transformation geometry , which studies the properties of geometric objects that are preserved by different kinds of transformations.
Compass and straightedge constructions  Main article: Compass and straightedge constructions  Classical geometers paid special attention to constructing geometric objects that had been described in some other way.
Classically, the only instruments used in most geometric constructions are the compass and straightedge .
Also, every construction had to be complete in a finite number of steps.
However, some problems turned out to be difficult or impossible to solve by these means alone, and ingenious constructions using neusis , parabolas and other curves, or mechanical devices, were found.
Rotation and orientation  Main articles: Rotation (geometry) and Orientation (geometry)  The geometrical concepts of rotation and orientation define part of the placement of objects embedded in the plane or in space.
Dimension  For broader coverage of this topic, see Dimension (mathematics) .
The Koch snowflake , with fractal dimension =log4/log3 and topological dimension =1  Where the traditional geometry allowed dimensions 1 (a line ), 2 (a plane ) and 3 (our ambient world conceived of as three-dimensional space ), mathematicians and physicists have used higher dimensions for nearly two centuries.
One example of a mathematical use for higher dimensions is the configuration space of a physical system, which has a dimension equal to the system's degrees of freedom .
For instance, the configuration of a screw can be described by five coordinates.
In general topology , the concept of dimension has been extended from natural numbers , to infinite dimension ( Hilbert spaces , for example) and positive real numbers (in fractal geometry ).
In algebraic geometry , the dimension of an algebraic variety has received a number of apparently different definitions, which are all equivalent in the most common cases.
Symmetry  Main article: Symmetry  A tiling of the hyperbolic plane  The theme of symmetry in geometry is nearly as old as the science of geometry itself.
Symmetric shapes such as the circle , regular polygons and platonic solids held deep significance for many ancient philosophers  and were investigated in detail before the time of Euclid.
Symmetric patterns occur in nature and were artistically rendered in a multitude of forms, including the graphics of Leonardo da Vinci , M.
C.
Escher , and others.
In the second half of the 19th century, the relationship between symmetry and geometry came under intense scrutiny.
Felix Klein 's Erlangen program proclaimed that, in a very precise sense, symmetry, expressed via the notion of a transformation group , determines what geometry is .
Symmetry in classical Euclidean geometry is represented by congruences and rigid motions, whereas in projective geometry an analogous role is played by collineations , geometric transformations that take straight lines into straight lines.
However it was in the new geometries of Bolyai and Lobachevsky, Riemann, Clifford and Klein, and Sophus Lie that Klein's idea to 'define a geometry via its symmetry group ' found its inspiration.
Both discrete and continuous symmetries play prominent roles in geometry, the former in topology and geometric group theory ,   the latter in Lie theory and Riemannian geometry .
A different type of symmetry is the principle of duality in projective geometry , among other fields.
This meta-phenomenon can roughly be described as follows: in any theorem , exchange point with plane , join with meet , lies in with contains , and the result is an equally true theorem.
A similar and closely related form of duality exists between a vector space and its dual space .
Contemporary geometry  Euclidean geometry  Main article: Euclidean geometry  Euclidean geometry is geometry in its classical sense.
As it models the space of the physical world, it is used in many scientific areas, such as mechanics , astronomy , crystallography ,  and many technical fields, such as engineering ,   architecture ,   geodesy ,   aerodynamics ,  and navigation .
The mandatory educational curriculum of the majority of nations includes the study of Euclidean concepts such as points , lines , planes , angles , triangles , congruence , similarity , solid figures , circles , and analytic geometry .
Euclidean vectors  Main article: Euclidean vector  Euclidean vectors are used for a myriad of applications in physics and engineering, such as position , displacement , deformation , velocity , acceleration , force , etc.
Differential geometry  Differential geometry uses tools from calculus to study problems involving curvature.
Main article: Differential geometry  Differential geometry uses techniques of calculus and linear algebra to study problems in geometry.
It has applications in physics ,   econometrics ,  and bioinformatics ,  among others.
In particular, differential geometry is of importance to mathematical physics due to Albert Einstein 's general relativity postulation that the universe is curved .
Differential geometry can either be intrinsic (meaning that the spaces it considers are smooth manifolds whose geometric structure is governed by a Riemannian metric , which determines how distances are measured near each point) or extrinsic (where the object under study is a part of some ambient flat Euclidean space).
Non-Euclidean geometry  This section is an excerpt from Non-Euclidean geometry .
Behavior of lines with a common perpendicular in each of the three types of geometry In mathematics , non-Euclidean geometry consists of two geometries based on axioms closely related to those that specify Euclidean geometry .
As Euclidean geometry lies at the intersection of metric geometry and affine geometry , non-Euclidean geometry arises by either replacing the parallel postulate with an alternative, or relaxing the metric requirement.
In the former case, one obtains hyperbolic geometry and elliptic geometry , the traditional non-Euclidean geometries.
When the metric requirement is relaxed, then there are affine planes associated with the planar algebras , which give rise to kinematic geometries that have also been called non-Euclidean geometry.
Topology  Main article: Topology  A thickening of the trefoil knot  Topology is the field concerned with the properties of continuous mappings ,  and can be considered a generalization of Euclidean geometry.
In practice, topology often means dealing with large-scale properties of spaces, such as connectedness and compactness .
The field of topology, which saw massive development in the 20th century, is in a technical sense a type of transformation geometry , in which transformations are homeomorphisms .
This has often been expressed in the form of the saying 'topology is rubber-sheet geometry'.
Subfields of topology include geometric topology , differential topology , algebraic topology and general topology .
Algebraic geometry  Main article: Algebraic geometry  Quintic Calabi–Yau threefold  Algebraic geometry is fundamentally the study by means of algebraic methods of some geometrical shapes, called algebraic sets , and defined as common zeros of multivariate polynomials .
Algebraic geometry became an autonomous subfield of geometry c.
1900 , with a theorem called Hilbert's Nullstellensatz that establishes a strong correspondence between algebraic sets and ideals of polynomial rings .
This led to a parallel development of algebraic geometry, and its algebraic counterpart, called commutative algebra .
From the late 1950s through the mid-1970s algebraic geometry had undergone major foundational development, with the introduction by Alexander Grothendieck of scheme theory , which allows using topological methods , including cohomology theories in a purely algebraic context.
Scheme theory allowed to solve many difficult problems not only in geometry, but also in number theory .
Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is a famous example of a long-standing problem of number theory whose solution uses scheme theory and its extensions such as stack theory .
One of seven Millennium Prize problems , the Hodge conjecture , is a question in algebraic geometry.
Algebraic geometry has applications in many areas, including cryptography  and string theory .
Complex geometry  Main article: Complex geometry  Complex geometry studies the nature of geometric structures modelled on, or arising out of, the complex plane .
Complex geometry lies at the intersection of differential geometry, algebraic geometry, and analysis of several complex variables , and has found applications to string theory and mirror symmetry .
Complex geometry first appeared as a distinct area of study in the work of Bernhard Riemann in his study of Riemann surfaces .
Work in the spirit of Riemann was carried out by the Italian school of algebraic geometry in the early 1900s.
Contemporary treatment of complex geometry began with the work of Jean-Pierre Serre , who introduced the concept of sheaves to the subject, and illuminated the relations between complex geometry and algebraic geometry.
The primary objects of study in complex geometry are complex manifolds , complex algebraic varieties , and complex analytic varieties , and holomorphic vector bundles and coherent sheaves over these spaces.
Special examples of spaces studied in complex geometry include Riemann surfaces, and Calabi–Yau manifolds , and these spaces find uses in string theory.
In particular, worldsheets of strings are modelled by Riemann surfaces, and superstring theory predicts that the extra 6 dimensions of 10 dimensional spacetime may be modelled by Calabi–Yau manifolds.
Discrete geometry  Main article: Discrete geometry  Discrete geometry includes the study of various sphere packings .
Discrete geometry is a subject that has close connections with convex geometry .
It is concerned mainly with questions of relative position of simple geometric objects, such as points, lines and circles.
Examples include the study of sphere packings , triangulations , the Kneser-Poulsen conjecture, etc.
It shares many methods and principles with combinatorics .
Computational geometry  Main article: Computational geometry  Computational geometry deals with algorithms and their implementations for manipulating geometrical objects.
Important problems historically have included the travelling salesman problem , minimum spanning trees , hidden-line removal , and linear programming .
Although being a young area of geometry, it has many applications in computer vision , image processing , computer-aided design , medical imaging , etc.
Geometric group theory  Main article: Geometric group theory  The Cayley graph of the free group on two generators a and b  Geometric group theory uses large-scale geometric techniques to study finitely generated groups .
It is closely connected to low-dimensional topology , such as in Grigori Perelman 's proof of the Geometrization conjecture , which included the proof of the Poincaré conjecture , a Millennium Prize Problem .
Geometric group theory often revolves around the Cayley graph , which is a geometric representation of a group.
Other important topics include quasi-isometries , Gromov-hyperbolic groups , and right angled Artin groups .
Convex geometry  Main article: Convex geometry  Convex geometry investigates convex shapes in the Euclidean space and its more abstract analogues, often using techniques of real analysis and discrete mathematics .
It has close connections to convex analysis , optimization and functional analysis and important applications in number theory .
Convex geometry dates back to antiquity.
Archimedes gave the first known precise definition of convexity.
The isoperimetric problem , a recurring concept in convex geometry, was studied by the Greeks as well, including Zenodorus .
Archimedes, Plato , Euclid , and later Kepler and Coxeter all studied convex polytopes and their properties.
From the 19th century on, mathematicians have studied other areas of convex mathematics, including higher-dimensional polytopes, volume and surface area of convex bodies, Gaussian curvature , algorithms , tilings and lattices .
Applications  Geometry has found applications in many fields, some of which are described below.
Art  Main article: Mathematics and art  Bou Inania Madrasa, Fes, Morocco, zellige mosaic tiles forming elaborate geometric tessellations  Mathematics and art are related in a variety of ways.
For instance, the theory of perspective showed that there is more to geometry than just the metric properties of figures: perspective is the origin of projective geometry .
Artists have long used concepts of proportion in design.
Vitruvius developed a complicated theory of ideal proportions for the human figure.
These concepts have been used and adapted by artists from Michelangelo to modern comic book artists.
The golden ratio is a particular proportion that has had a controversial role in art.
Often claimed to be the most aesthetically pleasing ratio of lengths, it is frequently stated to be incorporated into famous works of art, though the most reliable and unambiguous examples were made deliberately by artists aware of this legend.
Tilings , or tessellations, have been used in art throughout history.
Islamic art makes frequent use of tessellations, as did the art of M.
C.
Escher .
Escher's work also made use of hyperbolic geometry .
Cézanne advanced the theory that all images can be built up from the sphere , the cone , and the cylinder .
This is still used in art theory today, although the exact list of shapes varies from author to author.
Architecture  Main articles: Mathematics and architecture and Architectural geometry  Geometry has many applications in architecture.
In fact, it has been said that geometry lies at the core of architectural design.
Applications of geometry to architecture include the use of projective geometry to create forced perspective ,  the use of conic sections in constructing domes and similar objects,  the use of tessellations ,  and the use of symmetry.
Physics  Main article: Mathematical physics  The field of astronomy , especially as it relates to mapping the positions of stars and planets on the celestial sphere and describing the relationship between movements of celestial bodies, have served as an important source of geometric problems throughout history.
Riemannian geometry and pseudo-Riemannian geometry are used in general relativity .
String theory makes use of several variants of geometry,  as does quantum information theory .
Other fields of mathematics  The Pythagoreans discovered that the sides of a triangle could have incommensurable lengths.
Calculus was strongly influenced by geometry.
For instance, the introduction of coordinates by René Descartes and the concurrent developments of algebra marked a new stage for geometry, since geometric figures such as plane curves could now be represented analytically in the form of functions and equations.
This played a key role in the emergence of infinitesimal calculus in the 17th century.
Analytic geometry continues to be a mainstay of pre-calculus and calculus curriculum.
Another important area of application is number theory .
In ancient Greece the Pythagoreans considered the role of numbers in geometry.
However, the discovery of incommensurable lengths contradicted their philosophical views.
Since the 19th century, geometry has been used for solving problems in number theory, for example through the geometry of numbers or, more recently, scheme theory , which is used in Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem .
Mathematics of Ancient Greeks  An illustration of Euclid 's proof of the Pythagorean theorem Greek mathematics refers to mathematics texts and ideas stemming from the Archaic through the Hellenistic and Roman periods, mostly from the 5th century BC to the 6th century AD, around the shores of the Mediterranean .
Greek mathematicians lived in cities spread over the entire region, from Anatolia to Italy and North Africa , but were united by Greek culture and the Greek language .
The development of mathematics as a theoretical discipline and the use of deductive reasoning in proofs is an important difference between Greek mathematics and those of preceding civilizations.
Origins and etymology   Greek mathēmatikē ("mathematics") derives from the Ancient Greek : μάθημα , romanized : máthēma , Attic Greek :    Koinē Greek :   , from the verb manthanein , "to learn".
Strictly speaking, a máthēma could be any branch of learning, or anything learnt; however, since antiquity certain mathēmata (mainly arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and harmonics) were granted special status.
The origins of Greek mathematics are not well documented.
The earliest advanced civilizations in Greece and Europe were the Minoan and later Mycenaean civilizations, both of which flourished during the 2nd millennium BC.
While these civilizations possessed writing and were capable of advanced engineering, including four-story palaces with drainage and beehive tombs , they left behind no mathematical documents.
Though no direct evidence is available, it is generally thought that the neighboring Babylonian and Egyptian civilizations had an influence on the younger Greek tradition.
Unlike the flourishing of Greek literature in the span of 800 to 600 BC, not much is known about Greek mathematics in this early period—nearly all of the information was passed down through later authors, beginning in the mid-4th century BC.
Archaic and Classical periods   Pythagoras with a tablet of ratios, detail from The School of Athens by Raphael (1509)  Greek mathematics allegedly began with Thales of Miletus (c.
624–548 BC).
Very little is known about his life, although it is generally agreed that he was one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece .
According to Proclus , he traveled to Babylon from where he learned mathematics and other subjects, coming up with the proof of what is now called Thales' Theorem .
An equally enigmatic figure is Pythagoras of Samos (c.
580–500 BC), who supposedly visited Egypt and Babylon,   and ultimately settled in Croton , Magna Graecia , where he started a kind of brotherhood.
Pythagoreans supposedly believed that "all is number" and were keen in looking for mathematical relations between numbers and things.
Pythagoras himself was given credit for many later discoveries, including the construction of the five regular solids .
However, Aristotle refused to attribute anything specifically to Pythagoras and only discussed the work of the Pythagoreans as a group.
Almost half of the material in Euclid 's Elements is customarily attributed to the Pythagoreans, including the discovery of irrationals, attributed to Hippasus (c.
530–450 BC) and Theodorus (fl.
450 BC).
The greatest mathematician associated with the group, however, may have been Archytas (c.
435-360 BC), who solved the problem of doubling the cube , identified the harmonic mean , and possibly contributed to optics and mechanics .
Other mathematicians active in this period, not fully affiliated with any school, include Hippocrates of Chios (c.
470–410 BC), Theaetetus (c.
417–369 BC), and Eudoxus (c.
408–355 BC).
Greek mathematics also drew the attention of philosophers during the Classical period .
Plato (c.
428–348 BC), the founder of the Platonic Academy , mentions mathematics in several of his dialogues.
While not considered a mathematician, Plato seems to have been influenced by Pythagorean ideas about number and believed that the elements of matter could be broken down into geometric solids.
He also believed that geometrical proportions bound the cosmos together rather than physical or mechanical forces.
Aristotle (c.
384–322 BC), the founder of the Peripatetic school , often used mathematics to illustrate many of his theories, as when he used geometry in his theory of the rainbow and the theory of proportions in his analysis of motion.
Much of the knowledge about ancient Greek mathematics in this period is thanks to records referenced by Aristotle in his own works.
Hellenistic and Roman periods   A fragment from Euclid 's Elements (c.
300 BC), considered the most influential mathematics textbook of all time   The Hellenistic era began in the late 4th century BC, following Alexander the Great's conquest of the Eastern Mediterranean , Egypt , Mesopotamia , the Iranian plateau , Central Asia , and parts of India , leading to the spread of the Greek language and culture across these regions.
Greek became the lingua franca of scholarship throughout the Hellenistic world, and the mathematics of the Classical period merged with Egyptian and Babylonian mathematics to give rise to Hellenistic mathematics.
Greek mathematics and astronomy reached its acme during the Hellenistic and early Roman periods , and much of the work represented by authors such as Euclid (fl.
300 BC), Archimedes (c.
287–212 BC), Apollonius (c.
240–190 BC), Hipparchus (c.
190–120 BC), and Ptolemy (c.
100–170 AD) was of a very advanced level and rarely mastered outside a small circle.
There is also evidence of combining mathematical knowledge with technical or practical applications, as found for instance in the work of Menelaus of Alexandria (c.
70–130 AD), who wrote a work dealing with the geometry of the sphere and its application to astronomical measurements and calculations ( Spherica ).
Similar examples of applied mathematics include the construction of analogue computers like the Antikythera mechanism ,   the accurate measurement of the circumference of the Earth by Eratosthenes (276–194 BC), and the mechanical works of Hero (c.
10–70 AD).
Several centers of learning appeared during the Hellenistic period, of which the most important one was the Mouseion in Alexandria , Egypt , which attracted scholars from across the Hellenistic world (mostly Greek, but also Egyptian , Jewish , Persian , among others).
Although few in number, Hellenistic mathematicians actively communicated with each other; publication consisted of passing and copying someone's work among colleagues.
Later mathematicians in the Roman era include Diophantus (c.
214–298 AD), who wrote on polygonal numbers and a work in pre-modern algebra ( Arithmetica ),    Pappus of Alexandria (c.
290–350 AD), who compiled many important results in the Collection ,   Theon of Alexandria (c.
335–405 AD) and his daughter Hypatia (c.
370–415 AD), who edited Ptolemy's Almagest and other works,   and Eutocius of Ascalon ( c.
480–540 AD), who wrote commentaries on treatises by Archimedes and Apollonius.
Although none of these mathematicians, save perhaps Diophantus, had notable original works, they are distinguished for their commentaries and expositions.
These commentaries have preserved valuable extracts from works which have perished, or historical allusions which, in the absence of original documents, are precious because of their rarity.
Most of the mathematical texts written in Greek survived through the copying of manuscripts over the centuries.
While some fragments dating from antiquity have been found above all in Egypt , as a rule they do not add anything significant to our knowledge of Greek mathematics preserved in the manuscript tradition.
Achievements   Greek mathematics constitutes an important period in the history of mathematics : fundamental in respect of geometry and for the idea of formal proof .
Greek mathematicians also contributed to number theory , mathematical astronomy , combinatorics , mathematical physics , and, at times, approached ideas close to the integral calculus .
Eudoxus of Cnidus developed a theory of proportion that bears resemblance to the modern theory of real numbers using the Dedekind cut , developed by Richard Dedekind , who acknowledged Eudoxus as inspiration.
Euclid , who presumably wrote on optics, astronomy, and harmonics, collected many previous mathematical results and theorems in the Elements , a canon of geometry and elementary number theory for many centuries.
Archimedes made use of a technique dependent on a form of proof by contradiction to reach answers to problems with an arbitrary degree of accuracy, while specifying the limits within which the answers lay.
Known as the method of exhaustion , Archimedes employed it in several of his works, including an approximation to π ( Measurement of the Circle ),  and a proof that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is 4/3 times the area of a triangle with equal base and height ( Quadrature of the Parabola ).
Archimedes also showed that the number of grains of sand filling the universe was not uncountable, devising his own counting scheme based on the myriad , which denoted 10,000 ( The Sand-Reckoner ).
The most characteristic product of Greek mathematics may be the theory of conic sections , which was largely developed in the Hellenistic period , starting with the work of Menaechmus and perfected primarily under Apollonius in his work Conics .
The methods employed in these works made no explicit use of algebra , nor trigonometry , the latter appearing around the time of Hipparchus .
Ancient Greek mathematics was not limited to theoretical works but was also used in other activities, such as business transactions and in land mensuration, as evidenced by extant texts where computational procedures and practical considerations took more of a central role.
Transmission and the manuscript tradition   Cover of Diophantus' Arithmetica in Latin  Although the earliest Greek language texts on mathematics that have been found were written after the Hellenistic period, many of these are considered to be copies of works written during and before the Hellenistic period.
The two major sources are  Byzantine codices , written some 500 to 1500 years after their originals, and  Syriac or Arabic translations of Greek works and Latin translations of the Arabic versions.
Nevertheless, despite the lack of original manuscripts, the dates of Greek mathematics are more certain than the dates of surviving Babylonian or Egyptian sources because a large number of overlapping chronologies exist.
Even so, many dates are uncertain; but the doubt is a matter of decades rather than centuries.
Netz (2011) has counted 144 ancient authors in the mathematical or exact sciences, from whom only 29 works are extant in Greek: Aristarchus , Autolycus , Philo of Byzantium , Biton , Apollonius , Archimedes , Euclid , Theodosius , Hypsicles , Athenaeus , Geminus , Hero , Apollodorus , Theon of Smyrna , Cleomedes , Nicomachus , Ptolemy , Gaudentius , Anatolius , Aristides Quintilian , Porphyry , Diophantus , Alypius , Damianus , Pappus , Serenus , Theon of Alexandria , Anthemius , and Eutocius .
The following works are extant only in Arabic translations:     Apollonius, Conics books V to VII  Apollonius, Cutting Off of a Ratio  Archimedes, Book of Lemmas  Archimedes, Construction of the Regular Heptagon  Diocles , On Burning Mirrors  Diophantus, Arithmetica books IV to VII  Euclid, On Divisions of Figures  Euclid, On Weights  Hero, Catoptrica  Hero, Mechanica  Menelaus , Sphaerica  Pappus, Commentary on Euclid's Elements book X  Ptolemy, Optics (extant in Latin from an Arabic translation of the Greek)  Ptolemy, Planisphaerium Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
Ancient Greek philosopher (c.
624 – c.
545 BC)  "Thales" redirects here.
For the company, see Thales Group .
For other uses, see Thales (disambiguation) .
Thales of Miletus Posthumous portrait of Thales by Wilhelm Meyer, based on a bust from the 4th century Born c.
626/623 BC Miletus , Ionian League (modern-day Balat , Didim , Aydın , Turkey ) Died c.
548/545 BC (aged c.
78) Era Pre-Socratic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Ionian / Milesian Main interests metaphysics mathematics astronomy Notable ideas Philosophical inquiry Water is the arche Thales's theorem Intercept theorem Know thyself Static electricity   Thales of Miletus ( / ˈ θ eɪ l iː z /  THAY -leez ; Greek : Θαλῆς ; c.
626/623 – c.
548/545 BC ) was an Ancient Greek  pre-Socratic  philosopher from Miletus in Ionia , Asia Minor .
Thales was one of the Seven Sages , founding figures of Ancient Greece , and credited with the saying " know thyself " which was inscribed on the Temple of Apollo at Delphi .
Many regard him as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition , breaking from the prior use of mythology to explain the world and instead using natural philosophy .
He is thus otherwise credited as the first to have engaged in mathematics , science , and deductive reasoning .
The first philosophers followed him in explaining all of nature as based on the existence of a single ultimate substance .
Thales theorized that this single substance was water .
Thales thought the Earth floated on water.
In mathematics, Thales is the namesake of Thales's theorem , and the intercept theorem can also be known as Thales's theorem.
Thales was said to have calculated the heights of the pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore.
In science, Thales was an astronomer who reportedly predicted the weather and a solar eclipse .
He was also credited with discovering the position of the constellation Ursa Major as well as the timings of the solstices and equinoxes .
Thales was also an engineer ; credited with diverting the Halys River .
Life The Ionic Stoa on the Sacred Way in Miletus .
The main source concerning the details of Thales's life and career is the doxographer  Diogenes Laërtius , in his third century AD work Lives and Opinions of the Eminent Philosophers .
While it is all we have, Diogenes wrote some eight centuries after Thales's death and his sources often contained "unreliable or even fabricated information."
It is known Thales was from Miletus , a mercantile city settled at the mouth of the Maeander river .
The dates of Thales's life are not exactly known, but are roughly established by a few datable events mentioned in the sources.
According to the historian Herodotus , writing in the 5th century BC, Thales predicted a solar eclipse in 585 BC.
Assuming one's acme occurred at the age of 40, the chronicle of Apollodorus of Athens , written during the 2nd century BC, therefore placed Thales's birth about the year 625 BC.
Ancestry and family Map of Phoenician (in yellow) and Greek colonies (in red) around 8th to 6th century BC.
While the probability is that Thales was as Greek as most Milesians,   Herodotus described Thales as "a Phoenician by remote descent".
Diogenes Laërtius references Herodotus, Duris , and Democritus , who all agree "that Thales was the son of Examyas and Cleobulina, and belonged to the Thelidae who are Phoenicians and amongst the noblest descendants of Cadmus and Agenor " who had been banished from Phoenicia and that Thales was enrolled as a citizen in Miletus along with Neleus .
However, Friedrich Nietzsche and others interpret this quote as meaning only that his ancestors were seafaring  Cadmeians from Boeotia .
It is also possible that he was of mixed ancestry, given his father had a Carian name and his mother had a Greek name.
Diogenes Laërtius seems to also reference an alternative account: "Most writers, however, represent him as a genuine Milesian and of a distinguished family".
Encyclopedia Britannica (1952) concluded that Thales was most likely a native Milesian of noble birth and that he was certainly a Greek.
Diogenes continues, by delivering more conflicting reports: one that Thales married and either fathered a son (Cybisthus or Cybisthon) or adopted his nephew of the same name; the second that he never married, telling his mother as a young man that it was too early to marry, and as an older man that it was too late.
Plutarch had earlier told this version: Solon visited Thales and asked him why he remained single; Thales answered that he did not like the idea of having to worry about children.
Nevertheless, several years later, anxious for family, he adopted his nephew Cybisthus.
Travels The culture of Archaic Greece was heavily influenced by those of the Levant and Mesopotamia .
It is said Thales was engaged in trade and visited either Egypt or Babylonia .
However, there is no strong evidence that Thales ever visited countries in the Near East , and the issue is disputed among scholars.
Visits to such places were a commonplace attribution to various philosophers by later writers, especially when these writers tried to explain the origin of their mathematical knowledge, such as with Thales or Pythagoras or Eudoxus .
Egypt Thales may have been educated in Egypt.
Several ancient authors assume that Thales, at one point in his life, visited Egypt , where he learned about geometry.
It is considered possible that Thales visited Egypt, since Miletus had a permanent colony there (namely Naucratis ).
It is also said Thales had close contacts with the priests of Thebes who instructed him, or even that he instructed them in geometry.
It is also possible Thales knew about Egypt from accounts of others, without actually visiting it.
Babylon Aside from Egypt, the other mathematically advanced, ancient civilization before the Greeks was Babylonia, another commonplace attribution of travel for a mathematically-minded philosopher.
At least one ancient historian, Josephus , claims Thales visited Babylonia.
Historians Roger L.
Cooke and B.L.
Van der Waerden come down on the side of Babylonian mathematics influencing the Greeks, citing the use of e.
g.
the sexagesimal system (or base 60).
Cooke notes "This relation, however, is controversial."
Others historians, such as D.
R.
Dicks, take issue with the idea of Babylonian influence on Greek mathematics.
For until around the time of Hipparchus (c.
190–120 BC) their sexagesimal system was unknown.
Herodotus wrote the Greeks learnt the gnomon from the Babylonians.
Thales's follower Anaximander is credited with introducing the gnomon to the Greeks.
Herodotus also wrote that the practice of dividing the day into 12 parts, and the polos , came to the Greeks from the Babylonians.
Yet this too is disputed, for example by historian L.
Zhmud, who points out the gnomon was known to both Egyptians and Babylonians, the division of the day into twelve parts (and by analogy the year) was known to the Egyptians already in the 2nd millennium BC , and the idea of the polos was not used outside of Greece at this time.
Sagacity Thales, Nuremberg Chronicle .
Thales is recognized as one of the Seven Sages of Greece, semi-legendary wise statesmen and founding figures of Ancient Greece.
While which seven one chooses may change, the seven has a canonical four which includes Thales, Solon of Athens, Pittacus of Mytilene , and Bias of Priene .
Diogenes Laërtius tells us that the Seven Sages were created in the archonship of Damasius at Athens about 582 BC and that Thales was the first sage.
Each sage has a quote or maxim attributed to him, which was inscribed on the Temple of Apollo at Delphi.
Thales has arguably the most famous of all, gnothi seauton or know thyself.
According to the 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia the Suda , the proverb is both "applied to those whose boasts exceed what they are" and "a warning to pay no attention to the opinion of the multitude."
Golden tripod Diogenes Laërtius relates several stories of an expensive, gold tripod or bowl that is to go to the most wise .
In one version (that Laërtius credits to Callimachus in his Iambics ) Bathycles of Arcadia states in his will that an expensive bowl "'should be given to him who had done most good by his wisdom.'
So it was given to Thales, went the round of all the sages, and came back to Thales again.
And he sent it to Apollo at Didyma , with this dedication...'Thales the Milesian, son of Examyas  to Delphinian Apollo after twice winning the prize from all the Greeks.'"
Diplomacy According to Diogenes Laërtius, Thales gained fame as a counselor when he advised the Milesians not to engage in a symmachia, a "fighting together", with the Lydians.
This has sometimes been interpreted as an alliance.
Croesus was defeated before the city of Sardis by Cyrus the Great , who subsequently spared Miletus because it had taken no action.
Cyrus was so impressed by Croesus’ wisdom and his connection with the sages that he spared him and took his advice on various matters.
The Ionian cities should be demoi, or "districts".
He counselled them to establish a single seat of government, and pointed out Teos as the fittest place for it; "for that," he said, "was the centre of Ionia .
Their other cities might still continue to enjoy their own laws, just as if they were independent states."
Miletus, however, received favorable terms from Cyrus.
The others remained in an Ionian League of twelve cities (excluding Miletus), and were subjugated by the Persians.
Theories and studies Early Greeks, and other civilizations before them, often invoked idiosyncratic explanations of natural phenomena with reference to the will of anthropomorphic  gods and heroes .
Instead, Thales aimed to explain natural phenomena via rational hypotheses that referenced natural processes themselves.
Logos rather than mythos .
Many, most notably Aristotle, regard him as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition .
Rather than theologoi or mythologoi , Aristotle referred to the first philosophers as physiologoi , or natural philosophers, and Thales as the first among them.
Also, while the other Seven Sages were strictly law-givers and statesmen and not speculative philosophers, Plutarch noted "it would seem that Thales was the only wise man of the time who carried his speculations beyond the realm of the practical."
Water is the arche See also: Classical element § Hellenistic philosophy Thales depicted at the Baths of the Seven Sages .
Thales's most famous idea was his philosophical and cosmological thesis that all is water, which comes down to us through a passage from Aristotle 's Metaphysics .
In the work, Aristotle reported Thales's theory that the arche or originating principle of nature was a single material substance : water.
Aristotle then proceeded to proffer a number of conjectures based on his own observations to lend some credence to why Thales may have advanced this idea (though Aristotle did not hold it himself).
While Aristotle's conjecture on why Thales held water as the originating principle of matter is his own thinking, his statement that Thales held it as water is generally accepted as genuinely originating with Thales.
Writing centuries later, Diogenes Laërtius also states that Thales taught "Water constituted ( ὑπεστήσατο , 'stood under') the principle of all things."
According to Aristotle:   That from which is everything that exists and from which it first becomes and into which it is rendered at last, its substance remaining under it, but transforming in qualities, that they say is the element and principle of things that are.
…For it is necessary that there be some nature ( φύσις ), either one or more than one, from which become the other things of the object being saved...
 do not all agree as to the number and the nature of these principles.
Thales the founder of this type of philosophy says that it is water.
Aristotle further adds: Presumably he derived this assumption from seeing that the nutriment of everything is moist, and that heat itself is generated from moisture and depends upon it for its existence (and that from which a thing is generated is always its first principle).
He derived his assumption from this; and also from the fact that the seeds of everything have a moist nature, whereas water is the first principle of the nature of moist things."
The 1870 book Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology noted:   In his dogma that water is the origin of things, that is, that it is that out of which every thing arises, and into which every thing resolves itself, Thales may have followed Orphic cosmogonies, while, unlike them, he sought to establish the truth of the assertion.
Hence, Aristotle, immediately after he has called him the originator of philosophy brings forward the reasons which Thales was believed to have adduced in confirmation of that assertion; for that no written development of it, or indeed any book by Thales, was extant, is proved by the expressions which Aristotle uses when he brings forward the doctrines and proofs of the Milesian.
(p.
1016) Most agree that Thales's stamp on thought is the unity of substance.
Not merely the empirical claim that all is water, but the deeper philosophical claim that all is one.
For example, Friedrich Nietzsche , in his Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks , wrote:   Greek philosophy seems to begin with an absurd notion, with the proposition that water is the primal origin and the womb of all things.
Is it really necessary for us to take serious notice of this proposition?
It is, and for three reasons.
First, because it tells us something about the primal origin of all things; second, because it does so in language devoid of image or fable, and finally, because contained in it, if only embryonically, is the thought, "all things are one."
Mathematics   Megiston topos: apanta gar chorei  ( Μέγιστον τόπος· ἄπαντα γὰρ χωρεῖ.
)
The greatest is space, for it holds all things.
—attributed to Thales   Thales was known for introducing the theoretical and practical use of geometry to Greece, and has been described as the first person in the western world to apply deductive reasoning to geometry, making him the West's "first mathematician."
He is also credited with the West's oldest definition of number : a "collection of units," "following the Egyptian view".
The evidence for the primacy of Thales comes to us from a book by Proclus , who lived a thousand years afterward but is believed to have had a copy of Eudemus 's lost book History of Geometry (4th century BC).
Proclus wrote that Thales was the first to visit Egypt and bring the Egyptian study of mathematics to Greece, and that Thales "himself discovered many propositions and disclosed the underlying principles of many others to his successors, in some case his method being more general, in others more empirical."
In addition to Proclus, Hieronymus of Rhodes also cites Thales as the first Greek mathematician.
Proclus attributes to Thales the discovery that a circle is bisected by its diameter, that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal and that vertical angles are equal.
Two fundamental theorems of elementary geometry are customarily called Thales's theorem : one of them has to do with a triangle inscribed in a circle and having the circle's diameter as one side;  the other, also called the intercept theorem , is about an angle intercepted by two parallel lines, forming a pair of similar triangles .
Modern scholars are skeptical that anyone in Thales's time was producing mathematical proofs to the standard of later Greek mathematics, though not enough direct evidence remains to draw firm conclusions.
While Thales may have discovered some basic geometric relations and provided some justification for them, attribution to him of formal proofs is now thought to represent speculative rationalization and reconstruction by later authors, rather than concrete accomplishments of Thales himself or his contemporaries.
Vertical angles According to one author, while visiting Egypt,  Thales observed that when the Egyptians drew two intersecting lines, they would measure the vertical angles to make sure that they were equal.
Thales concluded that one could prove that all vertical angles are equal if one accepted some general notions such as: all straight angles are equal, equals added to equals are equal, and equals subtracted from equals are equal.
Right triangle inscribed in a circle Main article: Thales's theorem Thales's theorem: if AC is a diameter and B is a point on the diameter's circle, the angle ∠ ABC is a right angle.
Pamphila says that, having learnt geometry from the Egyptians, Thales was the first to inscribe in a circle a right-angled triangle, whereupon he sacrificed an ox .
This is sometimes cited as history's first mathematical discovery.
Due to the variations among testimonies, such as the story of the ox sacrifice being accredited to Pythagoras upon discovery of the Pythagorean theorem rather than Thales, some historians (such as D.
R.
Dicks) question whether such anecdotes have any historical worth whatsoever.
It is believed the Babylonians knew the theorem for special cases.
The theorem is mentioned and proved as part of the 31st proposition in the third book of Euclid 's Elements .
Dante's Paradiso refers to Thales's theorem in the course of a speech.
Similar triangles Main article: Intercept theorem The intercept theorem: DE / BC = AE / AC = AD / AB .
The story is told in Diogenes Laërtius , Pliny the Elder , and Plutarch ,   sourced from Hieronymus of Rhodes , that when Thales visited Egypt ,  he measured the height of the pyramids by their shadows at the moment when his own shadow was equal to his height.
According to Plutarch, it pleased the pharoah Amasis .
More practically, Thales was said to have the ability to measure the distances of ships at sea.
These stories indicate familiarity with the intercept theorem, and for this reason the 26th proposition in the first book of Euclid's Elements was attributed to Thales.
They also indicate that he was familiar with the Egyptian seked , or seqed , the ratio of the run to the rise of a slope ( cotangent ).
According to Kirk & Raven,  all you need for this feat is three straight sticks pinned at one end and knowledge of your altitude.
One stick goes vertically into the ground.
A second is made level.
With the third you sight the ship and calculate the seked from the height of the stick and its distance from the point of insertion to the line of sight.
Astronomy Urania, the Muse of Astronomy, Reveals to Thales the Secrets of the Skies Thales was also a noted astronomer credited in antiquity with describing the position of Ursa Minor , and he thought the constellation might be useful as a guide for navigation at sea.
He calculated the duration of the year and the timings of the equinoxes and solstices .
He is additionally attribute with calculating the position of the Pleiades .
Plutarch indicates that in his day (c.
AD 100) there was an extant work, the Astronomy , composed in verse and attributed to Thales.
While some say he left no writings, others say that he wrote On the Solstice and On the Equinox .
The Nautical Star-guide has also been attributed to him, but this was disputed even in ancient times.
No writing attributed to him has survived.
Lobon of Argus asserted that the writings of Thales amounted to two hundred lines.
Cosmological model Worldview of Thales (left) and pupil Anaximander (right).
Thales thought the Earth must be a flat disk or mound of land and dirt which is floating in an expanse of water.
Heraclitus Homericus states that Thales drew his conclusion from seeing moist substance turn into air, slime and earth.
It seems likely that Thales viewed the land as coming from the water on which it floated and the oceans that surround it, perhaps inspired by observing silt deposits.
He thought the stars were balls of dirt on fire.
He seemed to correctly gather that the moon reflects the Sun's light.
A crater on the Moon is named in his honor.
Meteorology Rather than assuming that earthquakes were the result of supernatural whims, Thales explained them by theorizing that the Earth floats on water and that earthquakes occur when the Earth is rocked by waves.
He is attributed with the first observation of the Hyades , supposed by the ancients to indicate the approach of rain when they rose with the Sun.
According to Seneca , Thales explained the flooding of the Nile as due to the river being beaten back by the etesian wind.
Olive presses An olive mill and an olive press dating from Roman times in Capernaum, Israel .
A story, with different versions, recounts how Thales achieved riches from an olive harvest by prediction of the weather .
In one version, he bought all the olive presses in Miletus after predicting the weather and a good harvest for a particular year.
Another version of the story has Aristotle explain that Thales had reserved presses in advance, at a discount, and could rent them out at a high price when demand peaked, following his prediction of a particularly good harvest.
This first version of the story would constitute the first historically known creation and use of futures , whereas the second version would be the first historically known creation and use of options .
Aristotle explains that Thales's objective in doing this was not to enrich himself but to prove to his fellow Milesians that philosophy could be useful, contrary to what they thought,  or alternatively, Thales had made his foray into enterprise because of a personal challenge put to him by an individual who had asked why, if Thales was an intelligent famous philosopher, he had yet to attain wealth.
Prediction of solar eclipse Main article: Eclipse of Thales As mentioned above, according to Herodotus, Thales predicted a solar eclipse which occurred during a battle between the Lydians and the Medes .
Among eclipses of the era, only the eclipse of May 28, 585 BC reached totality in Anatolia where the war took place.
American writer Isaac Asimov described this battle as the earliest historical event whose date is known with precision to the day, and called the prediction "the birth of science".
As well as first mathematician and first philosopher, Thales is often given the label of the first western scientist and the "father of science".
but some contemporary scholars reject this interpretation.
Total eclipse of the Sun Herodotus writes that in the sixth year of the war, the Lydians under King Alyattes and the Medes under Cyaxares were engaged in an indecisive battle when suddenly day turned into night, leading to both parties halting the fighting and negotiating a peace agreement.
Herodotus also mentions that the loss of daylight had been predicted by Thales.
He does not, however, mention the location of the battle.
Afterwards, on the refusal of Alyattes to give up his suppliants when Cyaxares sent to demand them of him, war broke out between the Lydians and the Medes, and continued for five years, with various success.
In the course of it the Medes gained many victories over the Lydians, and the Lydians also gained many victories over the Medes.
Among their other battles there was one night engagement.
As, however, the balance had not inclined in favour of either nation, another combat took place in the sixth year, in the course of which, just as the battle was growing warm, day was on a sudden changed into night.
This event had been foretold by Thales, the Milesian, who forewarned the Ionians of it, fixing for it the very year in which it actually took place.
The Medes and Lydians, when they observed the change, ceased fighting, and were alike anxious to have terms of peace agreed on.
However, based on the list of Median kings and the duration of their reign reported elsewhere by Herodotus, Cyaxares died 10 years before the eclipse.
D.
R.
Dicks joins other historians (F.
Martini, J.
L.
E.
Dreyer, O.
Neugebauer ) in rejecting the historicity of the eclipse story.
Dicks links the story of Thales discovering the cause for a solar eclipse with Herodotus' claim that Thales discovered the cycle of the sun with relation to the solstices, and concludes "he could not possibly have possessed this knowledge which neither the Egyptians nor the Babylonians nor his immediate successors possessed."
Falling into a well See also: The Astrologer who Fell into a Well Plato, Diogenes Laertius, and Hippolytus all relay the story that Thales was so intent upon watching the stars that he failed to watch where he was walking, and fell into a well.
"Thales was studying the stars and gazing into the sky, when he fell into a well, and a jolly and witty Thracian servant girl made fun of him, saying that he was crazy to know about what was up in the heavens while he could not see what was in front of him beneath his feet."
Engineering The Halys River As well as astronomy, Thales involved himself in other practical applications of mathematics, including engineering .
Another story by Herodotus is that Croesus sent his army to the Persian territory.
He was stopped by the river Halys , then unbridged.
Thales then got the army across the river by digging a diversion upstream so as to reduce the flow, making it possible to cross the river.
While Herodotus reported that most of his fellow Greeks believe that Thales did divert the river Halys to assist King Croesus' military endeavors, he himself finds it doubtful.
Plato praises Thales along with Anacharsis , who is credited as the originator of the potter's wheel and the anchor.
Divinity Thales (Electricity) , sculpture from "The Progress of Railroading" (1908), main facade of Union Station (Washington, DC) According to Aristotle, Thales thought "all things are full of gods",   i.
e.
lodestones had souls , because iron is attracted to them (by the force of magnetism ).
The same applied to amber for its capacity to generate static electricity .
The reasoning for such hylozoism or organicism seems to be if something moved, then it was alive, and if it was alive, then it must have a soul.
As well as gods seen in the movement caused by what came to be known as magnetism and electricity , it seems Thales also had a supreme God which structured the universe: "Thales", says Cicero ,  "assures that water is the principle of all things; and that God is that Mind which shaped and created all things from water."
According to Henry Fielding (1775), Diogenes Laërtius (1.35) affirmed that Thales posed "the independent pre-existence of God from all eternity, stating "that God was the oldest of all beings, for he existed without a previous cause even in the way of generation; that the world was the most beautiful of all things; for it was created by God."
Nicholas Molinari has recently argued that Thales was influenced by the archaic water deity Acheloios , who was equated with water and worshipped in Miletus during Thales's life.
For evidence, he points to the fact that hydor meant specifically "fresh water," and also that Acheloios was seen as a shape-shifter in myth and art, so able to become anything.
He also points out that the rivers of the world were seen as the " sinews of Acheloios" in antiquity, and this multiplicity of deities is reflected in Thales's idea that "all things are full of gods."
Death and legacy Diogenes Laërtius quotes Apollodorus as saying that Thales died at the age of 78 during the 58th Olympiad (548–545 BC) and attributes his death to heat stroke and thirst while watching the games.
Influence Detail of Thales from The Beginnings of Science (1906) by Veloso Salgado As the first philosopher and mathematician, Thales had a profound influence on other Greek thinkers and therefore on Western history.
However, due to the scarcity of sources concerning Thales and the discrepancies between the accounts given in the sources that have survived, there is a scholarly debate over the extent of the influence of Thales had and on which of the Greek philosophers and mathematicians that came after him.
The first three philosophers in the Western tradition were all cosmologists from Miletus, and Thales was the very first, followed by Anaximander , who was followed in turn by Anaximenes .
They have been dubbed the Milesian school .
According to the Suda , Thales had been the "teacher and kinsman" of Anaximander.
Rather than water, Anaximander held all was made of apeiron or the unlimited; while Anaximenes, the successor of Anaximander, perhaps more like Thales with water, held that everything was composed of air .
John Burnet (1892) noted   Lastly, we have one admitted instance of a philosophic guild, that of the Pythagoreans .
And it will be found that the hypothesis, if it is to be called by that name, of a regular organisation of scientific activity will alone explain all the facts.
The development of doctrine in the hands of Thales, Anaximander , and Anaximenes , for instance, can only be understood as the elaboration of a single idea in a school with a continuous tradition.
As two of the first Greek mathematicians, Thales is also considered an influence on Pythagoras.
According to Iamblichus, Pythagoras "had benefited by the instruction of Thales in many respects, but his greatest lesson had been to learn the value of saving time."
Early sources  report that Pythagoras, in this story a pupil of Anaximander, visited Thales as a young man, and that Thales advised him to travel to Egypt to further his philosophical and mathematical studies.
Thales was also considered the teacher of the astronomer Mandrolytus of Priene.
It is possible he was also the teacher of Cleostratus of Tenedos.
Notes   ^  This use of hearsay and a lack of citing original sources leads some historians, like Dicks and Werner Jaeger, to view the whole idea of pre-Socratic philosophy as a construct from a later age, "fashioned during the two or three generations from Plato to the immediate pupils of Aristotle".
^  In addition, his supposed mother, Cleobulina, has also been described as his companion instead of his mother.
^  The exact meaning of this use of the word polos is unknown, current theories include: "the heavenly dome", "the tip of the axis of the celestial sphere", or a spherical concave sundial.
^  The same story, however, asserts that Thales emigrated to Miletus; and that he did not become a student of nature until after his political career.
This story has to be rejected if one is to believe that Thales was a native of Miletus, and other typical things about him like his prediction of the eclipse.
^  The aphorism has also been attributed to various other philosophers.
Diogenes Laërtius attributes it to Thales   but notes that Antisthenes in his Successions of Philosophers attributes it instead to Phemonoe , a mythical Greek poet.
The Roman poet Juvenal quotes the phrase in Greek and states that the precept descended e caelo (from heaven).
Other names of potential include Pythagoras  and Heraclitus .
^  Historian Abraham Feldman wrote that for Thales "...water united all things...all whatness is wetness".
^  Feldman notes "The social significance of water in the time of Thales induced him to discern through hardware and dry-goods, through soil and sperm, blood, sweat and tears, one fundamental fluid stuff...water, the most commonplace and powerful material known to him."
^  While some historians, such as Colin R.
Fletcher, note there could have been a precursor to Thales named by Eudemus, without the work "the question becomes mere speculation."
Fletcher grants there is no other viable contender to the title of first Greek mathematician, and that Thales qualifies as a practitioner in the field.
"Thales had at his command the techniques of observation, experimentation, superposition and deduction...
he has proved himself mathematician."
^  A right triangle with two equal legs is a 45-degree right triangle, all of which are similar.
The length of the pyramid's shadow measured from the center of the pyramid at that moment must have been equal to its height.
^  The seked is at the base of problems 56, 57, 58, 59 and 60 of the Rhind papyrus — an ancient Egyptian mathematical document.
^  According to Diogenes Laertius, the Nautical Astronomy attributed to Thales was written by Phocus of Samos.
^  The Scottish philosopher Adam Smith once similarly, absent-mindedly fell into a tannery pit.
^  Edmund Husserl  attempts to capture the new movement as follows.
Philosophical man is a "new cultural configuration" based in stepping back from "pregiven tradition" and taking up a rational "inquiry into what is true in itself;" that is, an ideal of truth.
References   ^ a  b  c  Russell, Bertrand (1945).
A History of Western Philosophy .
Simon & Schuster.
^  Translation of his biography on Thales: Thales  Archived 9 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine , classicpersuasion site; original Greek text, under ΘΑΛΗΣ , the Library of Ancient Texts Online site.
^  See McKirahan, Richard D.
Jr. (1994).
Philosophy Before Socrates .
Indianapolis: Hackett.
p.
5 .
ISBN  978-0-87220-176-7 .
^  Jaeger, Werner (1948).
Aristotle (2nd ed.).
p.
454.
^ a  b  Herodotus, 1.74.2 , and A.
D.
Godley's footnote 1; Pliny, 2.9 (12) and Bostock's footnote 2.
^  Cohen, Mark S.; Curd, Patricia; Reeve, C.
D.
C.
(2011).
Readings in Ancient Greek Philosophy (Fourth Edition): From Thales to Aristotle .
Indianapolis, Indiana: Hackett Publishing.
p.
10.
ISBN  978-1603846073 .
^ a  b  Frank N.
Magill, The Ancient World: Dictionary of World Biography , Volume 1 , Routledge, 2003 ISBN  1135457395   ^ a  b  c  d  e  Kirk, G.
S.; Raven, J.
E.
(1957).
"Chapter II: Thales of Miletus" .
The Presocratic Philosophers .
74–98.
^  Freely, John (2012).
The Flame of Miletus: The Birth of Science in Ancient Greece (And How It Changed the World) .
London: I.
B.
Tauris & Co. Ltd.
p.
7.
ISBN  978-1-78076-051-3 .
Retrieved 1 October 2017 .
^  Lawson, Russell M.
(2004).
Science in the Ancient World: An Encyclopedia .
Santa Barbara, California; Denver, Colorado; and Oxford, England: ABC CLIO.
234–235.
ISBN  978-1-85109-534-6 .
^  Thatcher, Oliver J.
(2004).
The Library Of Original Sources: The Greek World .
The Minerva Group, Inc.
p.
138.
ISBN  978-1-4102-1402-7 .
^  Nietzsche, Friedrich (2001).
The Pre-Platonic Philosophers .
University of Illinois Press.
p.
23.
ISBN  978-0252025594 .
^ a  b  Alexander Herda.
Burying a sage: the heroon of Thales in the agora of Miletos: With remarks on some other excavated Heroa and on cults and graves of the mythical founders of the city.
2èmes Rencontres d'archéologie de l'IFEA : Le Mort dans la ville Pratiques, contextes et impacts des inhumations intra-muros en Anatolie, du début de l'Age du Bronze à l'époque romaine., Nov 2011, Istanbul, Turkey.
67–122   ^ a  b  Yust, Walter (1952).
Encyclopaedia Britannica: A New Survey of Universal Knowledge .
Encyclopaedia Britannica .
p.
13.
^  Guthrie, W.
K.
C.
(1978).
A History of Greek Philosophy: The Earlier Presocratics and the Pythagoreans .
p.
50.
ISBN  978-0-521-29420-1 .
^  Goodman, Ellen (1995).
The Origins of the Western Legal Tradition: From Thales to the Tudors .
Federation Press.
p.
9.
ISBN  978-1-86287-181-6 .
^  Plant, I.
M.
(2004).
Women Writers of Ancient Greece and Rome: An Anthology .
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
29–32.
^  Plutarch (1952).
"Solon".
In Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.).
Lives .
Great Books of the Western World.
14.
Chicago: William Benton.
p.
66.
^  Riedweg, Christoph (2005) , Pythagoras: His Life, Teachings, and Influence , Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, ISBN  978-0-8014-7452-1 p.
7   ^  Plutarch, Life of Solon § 2.4   ^  O'Grady, Patricia F.
(2017).
Thales of Miletus: The Beginnings of Western Science and Philosophy .
Taylor & Francis.
p.
263.
ISBN  978-1-351-89537-8 .
^  Hamlyn, David W.
(2002).
Being a Philosopher: The History of a Practice .
Routledge.
p.
7.
ISBN  978-1-134-97101-5 .
^ a  b  c  Russo, Lucio (2013).
The Forgotten Revolution: How Science Was Born in 300 BC and Why it Had to Be Reborn .
Translated by Levy, Silvio.
Springer.
p.
33.
ISBN  978-3642189043 .
^  Harrison, Frederic (1892).
The new calendar of great men: biographies of the 558 worthies of all ages .
London and New York: MacMillan & Co. p.
92.
^  Plutarch, On Isis And Osiris , ch.
10.
^  Ferguson, Kitty (2011).
Pythagoras: His Lives and the Legacy of a Rational Universe .
Icon Books Ltd.
p.
28.
ISBN  978-1-84831-250-0 .
^ a  b  c  Cooke, Roger L.
(2005).
The History of Mathematics: A Brief Course .
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
  ^ a  b  c  d  e  Dicks, D.
R.
(November 1959).
"Thales".
The Classical Quarterly .
9 (2): 294–309.
doi : 10.1017/S0009838800041586 .
S2CID  246881067 .
^  Diogenes Laertius (II, 1)   ^  "LacusCurtius • Ancient Astronomy: Polus (Smith's Dictionary, 1875)" .
penelope.uchicago.edu .
^  Zhmud, Leonid (2006).
The Origin of the History of Science in Classical Antiquity .
Die Deutsche Bibliothek.
^  Diogenes Laërtius 1.22   ^  "SOL Search" .
www.cs.uky.edu .
^  Lives I.40   ^  "SOL Search" .
^  Satires 11.27   ^  Vico, Giambattista; Visconti, Gian Galeazzo (1993).
On humanistic education: (six inaugural orations, 1699–1707) .
Six Inaugural Orations, 1699–1707 From the Definitive Latin Text, Introduction, and Notes of Gian Galeazzo Visconti.
Cornell University Press.
p.
4 .
ISBN  0801480876 .
^  Doctoral thesis, "Know Thyself in Greek and Latin Literature," Eliza G.
Wilkens, U.
Chi, 1917, p.
12 ( online ).
^  Laërtius 1925 , § 28   ^  Diogenes Laërtius 1.25   ^ a  b  Herodotus.
The Histories .
Translated by Rawlinson, George.
^ a  b  O'Grady, Patricia F.
(2017).
p.
102.
ISBN  978-1-351-89536-1 .
^ a  b  c  Aristotle , Metaphysics Alpha, 983b.
http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0086.tlg025.perseus-eng1:1.983b   ^ a  b   Smith, William , ed.
(1870).
"Thales" .
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .
p.
1016.
^  Plutarch, Life of Solon, 3.5   ^  Diogenes Laërtius .
Lives of the Eminent Philosophers .
Book 1, paragraph 27.
^ a  b  Feldman, Abraham (October 1945).
"Thoughts on Thales".
The Classical Journal .
41 (1): 4–6.
ISSN  0009-8353 .
JSTOR  3292119 .
^  Aristotle.
"Book I 983b" .
Aristotle, Metaphysics .
Perseus Project .
^  § 3   ^  Laërtius 1925 , § 35   ^  Boyer 1989 , p.
43 (3rd ed.)
^ a  b  c  d  e  f  Fletcher, Colin R.
(December 1982).
"Thales – our founder?".
The Mathematical Gazette .
66 (438): 267.
doi : 10.2307/3615512 .
JSTOR  3615512 .
S2CID  125626522 .
^  Nicomachus of Gerasa (1926).
"Introduction to Arithmetic" .
Macmillan.
^  A History of Greek Mathematics, Heath, p.
70   ^ a  b  Bulmer-Thomas, Ivor (1939).
Selections Illustrating the History of Greek Mathematics .
164–169.
^  Sidoli, Nathan (2018).
"Greek mathematics"  (PDF) .
In Jones, A.; Taub, L.
(eds.).
The Cambridge History of Science: Vol.
1, Ancient Science .
345–373.
^  Shute, William George; Shirk, William W.; Porter, George F.
(1960).
Plane and Solid Geometry .
American Book Company .
25–27.
^  Boyer 1989 , p.
"Ionia and the Pythagoreans" p.
43.
^  de Laet, Siegfried J.
(1996).
History of Humanity: Scientific and Cultural Development .
UNESCO , Volume 3, p.
14.
ISBN  92-3-102812-X   ^  Boyer, Carl B.
and Merzbach, Uta C.
(2010).
A History of Mathematics .
John Wiley and Sons, Chapter IV.
ISBN  0-470-63056-6   ^  Heath, Thomas L.
(1956).
2 (Books 3–9) (2nd ed.).
Dover.
p.
61.
ISBN  0486600890 .
Originally published by Cambridge University Press.
1st edition 1908, 2nd edition 1926.
^  canto 13, lines 101–102   ^  Plutarch, Moralia, The Dinner of the Seven Wise Men, 147A   ^  J J O'Connor and E F Robertson   ^  "Ars Quatuor Coronatorum: Being the Transactions of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge No.
2076, London" .
W.
J.
Parre H, Limited.
10 June 1897.
^  History of Astronomy, by Richard Perason, p.
65   ^  Proclus, In Euclidem , 352   ^  Plutarch, De Pythiae oraculis , 18.
^  D.L.
I.34   ^  Allman, George Johnston (1911).
"Thales of Miletus" .
26 (11th ed.).
p.
721.
^  Harris, Roy (2005).
The Semantics of Science .
Continuum International.
p.
31.
^  Pseudo-Plutarch, Placita Philosopharum § 2.13   ^  Pseudo-Plutarch, Placita Philosopharum § 2.28   ^  Krech III, Shepard; Merchant, Carolyn; McNeill, John Robert, eds.
(2003).
"Earthquakes".
Encyclopedia of World Environmental History .
1: A–G.
358–364.
^  History of Meteorology to 1800 by H.
Howard Frisinger p.
3   ^  Ibid, p.
4   ^  George Crawford, Bidyut Sen – Derivatives for Decision Makers: Strategic Management Issues , John Wiley & Sons, 1996 ISBN  978-0471129943   ^  Aristotle, Politics 1259a    ^  Singer, C.
(2008).
A Short History of Science to the 19th century .
Streeter Press.
p.
35.
^  Needham, C.
W.
(1978).
Cerebral Logic: Solving the Problem of Mind and Brain .
Loose Leaf.
p.
75.
ISBN  978-0-398-03754-3 .
^  Finkelberg, Aryeh (2017).
Heraclitus and Thales' Conceptual Scheme: A Historical Study .
Brill .
p.
318, fn.
38.
ISBN  978-9004338210 .
^  Herodotus : Histories 1,74,2 ( online )   ^  Alden A.
Mosshammer: Thales' Eclipse .
Transactions of the American Philological Association, Vol.
111, 1981, pp.
145–155 ( JSTOR )   ^  Wenskus, Otta (2016).
"Die angebliche Vorhersage einer Sonnenfinsternis durch Thales von Milet.
Warum sich diese Legende so hartnäckig hält und warum es wichtig ist, ihr nicht zu glauben"  (PDF) (in German).
2–17.
^  Theaetetus (174 A)   ^  D.L.
II.4–5   ^  Powell, Jim (1 March 1995).
"Brilliant but Absent-Minded Adam Smith | Jim Powell" .
fee.org .
^  Theaetetus 174a   ^  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.
 "Thales of Miletus" .
MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive .
University of St Andrews .
^  Herodotus.
"Ch.
75" .
Herodotus .
Translated by Godley, A.
D.
Harvard University Press.
^  Plato, Republic, Book 10, section 600a   ^  Aristotle .
De Anima .
p.
411a7.
^  Nathan Ida, Engineering Electromagnetics , Springer, 2015 ISBN  3319078062   ^  Sandywell, Barry (1996).
Presocratic Reflexivity: The Construction of Philosophical Discourse C.
600-450 BC .
Psychology Press.
p.
97.
ISBN  978-0-415-10170-7 .
^  Farrington, B., 1944 Greek Science.
Pelican   ^  Cicero .
De Natura Deorum .
p.
i.,10.
^  Fielding, Henry (1775).
An essay on conversation .
John Bell .
p.
346.
^  Nicholas J.
Molinari, Acheloios, Thales, and the Origin of Philosophy: A Response to the Neo-Marxians.
Oxford: Archaeopress, 2022 https://www.archaeopress.com/Archaeopress/Products/9781803270869 ; cf.
also Nicholas J.
Molinari, Concerning Water as the Archai: Acheloios, Thales, and the Origin of Philosophy.
A Dissertation Providing Philosophical, Mythological, and Archaeological Responses to the Neo-Marxians, Doctoral Dissertation, Newport, RI: Salve Regina University, 2020 https://philpapers.org/rec/MOLCWA-2   ^  Diogenes Laërtius.
"Lives of Eminent Philosophers" .
^  The Vienna Lecture   ^  Kirk, G.
S.
(1960).
"Popper on Science and Presocratics" .
Mind .
New Series.
67 (275): 330.
doi : 10.1093/mind/LXIX.275.318 .
JSTOR  2251995 .
^  Graham, Daniel W.
"Anaximenes (d.
528 B.C.E.)"
IEP .
Retrieved 20 July 2019 .
^  Burnet, John (1892).
Early Greek Philosophy .
A.
and C.
Black.
p.
29 .
^  Life of Pythagoras 3.13   ^  Curnow, Trevor (22 June 2006).
The Philosophers of the Ancient World: An A–Z Guide .
A&C Black.
ISBN  9780715634974 .
^  Webb, E.
J.
(1921).
"Cleostratus Redivivus" .
The Journal of Hellenic Studies .
41 : 70–85.
doi : 10.2307/624797 .
JSTOR  624797 .
S2CID  250254883 .
Works cited Boyer, C.B.
(1989).
New York: Wiley.
ISBN  978-0-471-09763-1 .
(1991 pbk ed.
ISBN  0-471-54397-7 ; 2011 3rd edition )  Burnet, John (1957) .
The Meridian Library.
Third Edition   Laërtius, Diogenes (1925).
"The Seven Sages: Thales" .
1:1.
Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.).
Loeb Classical Library.
Herodotus , Histories , A.
D.
Godley (translator), Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920; ISBN  0-674-99133-8 .
Online version at Perseus  Störig, Hans Joachim , Kleine Weltgeschichte der Philosophie .
Fischer, Frankfurt/M.
2004, ISBN  3-596-50832-0 .
Lloyd, G.
E.
R.
 Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle .
Nahm, Milton C.
(1962) .
Selections from Early Greek Philosophy .
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Pliny the Elder , The Natural History (eds.
John Bostock, M.D., F.R.S.
H.T.
Riley, Esq., B.A.)
London.
Taylor and Francis.
(1855).
Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
Turner, William (1913).
"Ionian School of Philosophy" .
In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).
Catholic Encyclopedia .
New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Allman, George Johnston (1911).
Further reading Couprie, Dirk L.
(2011).
Heaven and Earth in Ancient Greek Cosmology: from Thales to Heraclides Ponticus .
ISBN  978-1441981158 .
Luchte, James (2011).
Early Greek Thought: Before the Dawn .
London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
ISBN  978-0567353313 .
O'Grady, Patricia F.
(2002).
Western Philosophy Series.
58.
Ashgate.
ISBN  978-0754605331 .
Mazzeo, Pietro (2010).
Talete, il primo filosofo .
Bari: Editrice Tipografica.
Molinari, Nicholas J.
(2022).
Acheloios, Thales, and the Origin of Philosophy: A Response to the Neo-Marxians .
Archaeopress.
ISBN  9781803270869 .
Priou, Alex (2016).
"
The Origin and Foundations of Milesian Thought ."
The Review of Metaphysics 70, 3–31.
Wöhrle, Georg., ed.
(2014).
The Milesians: Thales.
Translation and additional material by Richard McKirahan .
Traditio Praesocratica.
Walter de Gruyter.
ISBN  978-3-11-031525-7 .
Russell, Bertrand (1947).
US: Simon & Schuster publisher.
ISBN  0-415-32505-6 .
External links    Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thales of Miletus .
Wikiquote has quotations related to Thales .
Wikisource has original works by or about: Thales  Thales of Miletus from The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy  Thales of Miletus MacTutor History of Mathematics  Thales' Theorem – Math Open Reference (with interactive animation)  Thales biography by Charlene Douglass (with extensive bibliography)  Thales of Miletus Life, Work and Testimonies by Giannis Stamatellos  Thales Fragments v t e Seven Sages of Greece  Cleobulus of Lindos  Solon of Athens  Chilon of Sparta  Bias of Priene  Thales of Miletus  Pittacus of Mytilene  Periander of Corinth  ( Myson of Chenae )  v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers  Aglaonice  Agrippa  Anaximander  Andronicus  Apollonius  Aratus  Aristarchus  Aristyllus  Attalus  Autolycus  Bion  Callippus  Cleomedes  Cleostratus  Conon  Eratosthenes  Euctemon  Eudoxus  Geminus  Heraclides  Hicetas  Hipparchus  Hippocrates of Chios  Hypsicles  Menelaus  Meton  Oenopides  Philip of Opus  Philolaus  Posidonius  Ptolemy  Pytheas  Seleucus  Sosigenes of Alexandria  Sosigenes the Peripatetic  Strabo  Thales  Theodosius  Theon of Alexandria  Theon of Smyrna  Timocharis  Works  Almagest  (Ptolemy)  Catasterismi  (Eratosthenes)  On Sizes and Distances  (Hipparchus)  On the Sizes and Distances  (Aristarchus)  On the Heavens  (Aristotle)  Instruments  Antikythera mechanism  Armillary sphere  Astrolabe  Dioptra  Equatorial ring  Gnomon  Mural instrument  Triquetrum  Concepts  Callippic cycle  Celestial spheres  Circle of latitude  Counter-Earth  Deferent and epicycle  Equant  Geocentrism  Heliocentrism  Hipparchic cycle  Inferior and superior planets  Metonic cycle  Octaeteris  Solstice  Spherical Earth  Sublunary sphere  Zodiac  Influences  Babylonian astronomy  Egyptian astronomy  Influenced  Medieval European science  Indian astronomy  Medieval Islamic astronomy  v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline)  Anaxagoras  Anthemius  Archytas  Aristaeus the Elder  Aristarchus  Aristotle  Apollonius  Archimedes  Autolycus  Bion  Bryson  Callippus  Carpus  Chrysippus  Cleomedes  Conon  Ctesibius  Democritus  Dicaearchus  Diocles  Diophantus  Dinostratus  Dionysodorus  Domninus  Eratosthenes  Eudemus  Euclid  Eudoxus  Eutocius  Geminus  Heliodorus  Heron  Hipparchus  Hippasus  Hippias  Hippocrates  Hypatia  Hypsicles  Isidore of Miletus  Leon  Marinus  Menaechmus  Menelaus  Metrodorus  Nicomachus  Nicomedes  Nicoteles  Oenopides  Pappus  Perseus  Philolaus  Philon  Philonides  Plato  Porphyry  Posidonius  Proclus  Ptolemy  Pythagoras  Serenus  Simplicius  Sosigenes  Sporus  Thales  Theaetetus  Theano  Theodorus  Theodosius  Theon of Alexandria  Theon of Smyrna  Thymaridas  Xenocrates  Zeno of Elea  Zeno of Sidon  Zenodorus  Treatises  Almagest  Archimedes Palimpsest  Arithmetica  Conics  (Apollonius)  Catoptrics  Data  (Euclid)  Elements  (Euclid)  Measurement of a Circle  On Conoids and Spheroids  On the Sizes and Distances  (Aristarchus)  On Sizes and Distances  (Hipparchus)  On the Moving Sphere  (Autolycus)  Optics  (Euclid)  On Spirals  On the Sphere and Cylinder  Ostomachion  Planisphaerium  Spherics  (Theodosius)  Spherics  (Menelaus)  The Quadrature of the Parabola  The Sand Reckoner  Problems  Constructible numbers  Angle trisection  Doubling the cube  Squaring the circle  Problem of Apollonius  Concepts and definitions  Angle  Central  Inscribed  Axiomatic system  Axiom  Chord  Circles of Apollonius  Apollonian circles  Apollonian gasket  Circumscribed circle  Commensurability  Diophantine equation  Doctrine of proportionality  Euclidean geometry  Golden ratio  Greek numerals  Incircle and excircles of a triangle  Method of exhaustion  Parallel postulate  Platonic solid  Lune of Hippocrates  Quadratrix of Hippias  Regular polygon  Straightedge and compass construction  Triangle center  Results In Elements  Angle bisector theorem  Exterior angle theorem  Euclidean algorithm  Euclid's theorem  Geometric mean theorem  Greek geometric algebra  Hinge theorem  Inscribed angle theorem  Intercept theorem  Intersecting chords theorem  Intersecting secants theorem  Law of cosines  Pons asinorum  Pythagorean theorem  Tangent-secant theorem  Thales's theorem  Theorem of the gnomon  Apollonius  Apollonius's theorem  Other  Aristarchus's inequality  Crossbar theorem  Heron's formula  Irrational numbers  Law of sines  Menelaus's theorem  Pappus's area theorem  Problem II.8 of Arithmetica  Ptolemy's inequality  Ptolemy's table of chords  Ptolemy's theorem  Spiral of Theodorus  Centers  Cyrene  Mouseion of Alexandria  Platonic Academy  Related  Ancient Greek astronomy  Attic numerals  Greek numerals  Latin translations of the 12th century  Non-Euclidean geometry  Philosophy of mathematics  Neusis construction  History of  A History of Greek Mathematics  by Thomas Heath  algebra  timeline  arithmetic  timeline  calculus  timeline  geometry  timeline  logic  timeline  mathematics  timeline  numbers  prehistoric counting  numeral systems  list  Other cultures  Arabian/Islamic  Babylonian  Chinese  Egyptian  Incan  Indian  Japanese   Ancient Greece portal •  Mathematics portal v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Pre-Socratic  Hippo  Pherecydes of Syros  Empedocles  Metrodorus of Lampsacus  Xeniades  Pythagorean  Pythagoras  Hippasus  Philolaus  Archytas  Lamiskos  Alcmaeon  Brontinus  Theano  Damo  Calliphon  Hermotimus  Metrodorus of Cos  Arignote  Myia  Eurytus  Ionian  Thales  Anaximander  Anaximenes  Xenophanes  Heraclitus  Anaxagoras  Archelaus  Diogenes  Metrodorus of Lampsacus  Atomist  Leucippus  Democritus  Eleatic  Parmenides  Zeno  Melissus  Sophist  Protagoras  Gorgias  Prodicus  Hippias   Classical  Socrates  Xenophon  Cynic  Antisthenes  Diogenes  Crates  Menippus  more...
 Cyrenaic  Aristippus  Aristippus the Younger  Theodorus the Atheist  Hegesias of Cyrene  Anniceris  more...
 Eretrian  Phaedo of Elis  Menedemus  Asclepiades of Phlius  Megarian  Euclid of Megara  Eubulides  Stilpo  Diodorus Cronus  Philo  more...
 Platonic  Plato  Speusippus  Xenocrates  more...
 Peripatetic  Aristotle  Theophrastus  Strato of Lampsacus  Lyco of Troas  Alexander of Aphrodisias  more...
  Hellenistic Pyrrhonist  Pyrrho  Timon of Phlius  Aenesidemus  Agrippa the Skeptic  Sextus Empiricus  more...
Stoic  Zeno of Citium  Cleanthes  Chrysippus  Panaetius  Posidonius  Seneca  Lucius Annaeus Cornutus  Musonius Rufus  Epictetus  Arrian  Marcus Aurelius  more...
 Epicurean  Epicurus  Metrodorus  Zeno of Sidon  Philodemus  Lucretius  Diogenes of Oenoanda  more...
Academic Skeptic  Arcesilaus  Carneades  Philo of Larissa  Cicero  more...
 Middle Platonic  Antiochus  Eudorus of Alexandria  Philo of Alexandria  Plutarch  Gaius  Apuleius  Alcinous  Galen  more...
 Neopythagorean  Nigidius Figulus  Apollonius of Tyana  Moderatus of Gades  Nicomachus  Numenius of Apamea  more...
 Neoplatonist  Ammonius Saccas  Plotinus  students  Origen  Porphyry  Iamblichus  Julian  Plutarch of Athens  Syrianus  Proclus  Ammonius Hermiae  Damascius  Simplicius  more...
 v t e Ancient Greece  Timeline  History Geography Periods  Cycladic civilization  Minoan civilization  Mycenaean Greece  Greek Dark Ages  Archaic Greece  Classical Greece  Hellenistic Greece  Roman Greece  Geography  Aegean Sea  Aeolis  Crete  Cyrenaica  Cyprus  Doris  Epirus  Hellespont  Ionia  Ionian Sea  Macedonia  Magna Graecia  Peloponnesus  Pontus  Taurica  Ancient Greek colonies  City states Politics Military City states  Argos  Athens  Byzantion  Chalcis  Corinth  Ephesus  Miletus  Pergamon  Eretria  Kerkyra  Larissa  Megalopolis  Thebes  Megara  Rhodes  Samos  Sparta  Lissus (Crete)  Kingdoms  Bithynia  Cappadocia  Epirus  Greco-Bactrian Kingdom  Indo-Greek Kingdom  Macedonia  Pergamon  Pontus  Ptolemaic Kingdom  Seleucid Empire  Federations / Confederations  Doric Hexapolis ( c.
1100 – c.
560 BC )  Italiote League ( c.
800 –389 BC)  Ionian League (c.
650–404 BC)  Peloponnesian League ( c.
550 –366 BC)  Amphictyonic League ( c.
595 –279 BC)  Acarnanian League (c.
500–31 BC)  Hellenic League (499–449 BC)  Delian League (478–404 BC)  Chalcidian League (430–348 BC)  Boeotian League (c.
424–c.
395 BC)  Aetolian League (c.
400–188 BC)  Second Athenian League (378–355 BC)  Thessalian League (374–196 BC)  Arcadian League (370–c.
230 BC)  Epirote League (370–168 BC)  League of Corinth (338–322 BC)  Euboean League (c.
300 BC–c.
300 AD)  Achaean League (280–146 BC)  Politics  Boule  Free city  Koinon  Proxeny  Tagus  Tyrant  Athenian  Agora  Areopagus  Ecclesia  Graphe paranomon  Heliaia  Ostracism  Spartan  Ekklesia  Ephor  Gerousia  Macedon  Synedrion  Koinon  Military  Wars  Athenian military  Scythian archers  Antigonid Macedonian army  Army of Macedon  Ballista  Cretan archers  Hellenistic armies  Hippeis  Hoplite  Hetairoi  Macedonian phalanx  Military of Mycenaean Greece  Phalanx  Peltast  Pezhetairos  Sarissa  Sacred Band of Thebes  Sciritae  Seleucid army  Spartan army  Strategos  Toxotai  Xiphos  Xyston  People List of ancient Greeks Rulers  Kings of Argos  Archons of Athens  Kings of Athens  Kings of Commagene  Diadochi  Kings of Macedonia  Kings of Paionia  Attalid kings of Pergamon  Kings of Pontus  Ptolemaic dynasty  Seleucid dynasty  Kings of Sparta  Tyrants of Syracuse  Artists & scholars  Astronomers  Geographers  Historians  Mathematicians  Philosophers  Playwrights  Poets  Seven Sages  Writers  Philosophers  Anaxagoras  Anaximander  Anaximenes  Antisthenes  Aristotle  Democritus  Diogenes of Sinope  Empedocles  Epicurus  Gorgias  Heraclitus  Hypatia  Leucippus  Parmenides  Plato  Protagoras  Pythagoras  Socrates  Thales  Zeno  Authors  Aeschylus  Aesop  Alcaeus  Archilochus  Aristophanes  Bacchylides  Euripides  Herodotus  Hesiod  Hipponax  Homer  Ibycus  Lucian  Menander  Mimnermus  Panyassis  Philocles  Pindar  Plutarch  Polybius  Sappho  Simonides  Sophocles  Stesichorus  Theognis  Thucydides  Timocreon  Tyrtaeus  Xenophon  Others  Athenian statesmen  Lawgivers  Olympic victors  Tyrants  By culture  Ancient Greek tribes  Thracian Greeks  Ancient Macedonians  Society Culture Society  Agriculture  Calendar  Clothing  Coinage  Cuisine  Economy  Education  Euergetism  Festivals  Folklore  Homosexuality  Law  Olympic Games  Pederasty  Philosophy  Prostitution  Religion  Slavery  Warfare  Wedding customs  Wine  Arts and science  Architecture  Greek Revival architecture  Astronomy  Literature  Mathematics  Medicine  Music  Musical system  Pottery  Sculpture  Technology  Theatre  Greco-Buddhist art  Religion  Funeral and burial practices  Mythology  mythological figures  Temple  Twelve Olympians  Underworld  Greco-Buddhism  Greco-Buddhist monasticism  Sacred places  Eleusis  Delphi  Delos  Dion  Dodona  Mount Olympus  Olympia  Structures  Athenian Treasury  Lion Gate  Long Walls  Philippeion  Theatre of Dionysus  Tunnel of Eupalinos  Temples  Aphaea  Artemis  Athena Nike  Erechtheion  Hephaestus  Hera, Olympia  Parthenon  Samothrace  Zeus, Olympia  Language  Proto-Greek  Mycenaean  Homeric  Dialects  Aeolic  Arcadocypriot  Attic  Doric  Epirote  Ionic  Locrian  Macedonian  Pamphylian  Koine  Writing  Linear A  Linear B  Cypriot syllabary  Greek alphabet  Greek numerals  Attic numerals  Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy  Alision  Brentesion  Caulonia  Chone  Croton  Cumae  Elea  Heraclea Lucania  Hipponion  Hydrus  Krimisa  Laüs  Locri  Medma  Metapontion  Neápolis  Pandosia (Lucania)  Poseidonia  Pixous  Rhegion  Scylletium  Siris  Sybaris  Sybaris on the Traeis  Taras  Terina  Thurii  Sicily  Akragas  Akrai  Akrillai  Apollonia  Calacte  Casmenae  Catana  Gela  Helorus  Henna  Heraclea Minoa  Himera  Hybla Gereatis  Hybla Heraea  Kamarina  Leontinoi  Megara Hyblaea  Messana  Naxos  Segesta  Selinous  Syracuse  Tauromenion  Thermae  Tyndaris  Aeolian Islands  Didyme  Euonymos  Ereikousa  Hycesia  Lipara/Meligounis  Phoenicusa  Strongyle  Therassía  Cyrenaica  Balagrae  Barca  Berenice  Cyrene ( Apollonia )  Ptolemais  Iberian Peninsula  Akra Leuke  Alonis  Emporion  Helike  Hemeroscopion  Kalathousa  Kypsela  Mainake  Menestheus's Limin  Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus  Rhode  Salauris  Zacynthos  Illyria  Aspalathos  Apollonia  Aulon  Epidamnos  Epidauros  Issa  Melaina Korkyra  Nymphaion  Orikon  Pharos  Tragurion  Thronion  Black Sea basin North coast  Akra  Borysthenes  Charax  Chersonesus  Dioscurias  Gorgippia  Hermonassa  Kalos Limen  Kepoi  Kerkinitis  Kimmerikon  Myrmekion  Nikonion  Nymphaion  Olbia  Pantikapaion  Phanagoria  Pityus  Tanais  Theodosia  Tyras  Tyritake  South coast  Abonoteichos  Amisos  Anchialos  Apollonia  Athina  Bathus  Dionysopolis  Cotyora  Cytorus  Eupatoria  Heraclea  Kerasous  Mesambria  Odessos  Oinòe  Phasis  Polemonion  Rhizos  Salmydessus  Sesamus  Sinope  Thèrmae  Tium  Trapezous  Tripolis  Zaliche  Lists  Cities  in Epirus  People  Place names  Stoae  Temples  Theatres    Category   Portal   Outline  Authority control databases  International  FAST  ISNI  VIAF  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  National  Spain  France  BnF data  Catalonia  Germany  Italy  Israel  United States  Japan  Czech Republic  Greece  Korea  Netherlands  Poland  Vatican  Academics  MathSciNet  zbMATH  People  Deutsche Biographie  Other  IdRef   Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thales_of_Miletus&oldid=1219128421 "5th-century BC Greek mathematician and astronomer  This article is about the mathematician.
For the Ancient Greek doctor, see Hippocrates .
The Lune of Hippocrates .
Partial solution of the " Squaring the circle " task, suggested by Hippocrates.
The area of the shaded figure is equal to the area of the triangle ABC.
This is not a complete solution of the task (the complete solution is proven to be impossible with compass and straightedge ).
Hippocrates of Chios ( Greek : Ἱπποκράτης ὁ Χῖος ; c.
470 – c.
410 BC) was an ancient Greek  mathematician , geometer , and astronomer .
He was born on the isle of Chios , where he was originally a merchant.
After some misadventures (he was robbed by either pirates or fraudulent customs officials) he went to Athens , possibly for litigation , where he became a leading mathematician.
On Chios, Hippocrates may have been a pupil of the mathematician and astronomer Oenopides of Chios.
In his mathematical work there probably was some Pythagorean influence too, perhaps via contacts between Chios and the neighboring island of Samos , a center of Pythagorean thinking: Hippocrates has been described as a 'para-Pythagorean', a philosophical 'fellow traveler'.
"Reduction" arguments such as reductio ad absurdum argument (or proof by contradiction) have been traced to him, as has the use of power to denote the square of a line.
Mathematics  The major accomplishment of Hippocrates is that he was the first to write a systematically organized geometry textbook, called Elements (Στοιχεῖα, Stoicheia ), that is, basic theorems, or building blocks of mathematical theory.
From then on, mathematicians from all over the ancient world could, at least in principle, build on a common framework of basic concepts, methods, and theorems, which stimulated the scientific progress of mathematics.
Only a single, famous fragment of Hippocrates' Elements is existent, embedded in the work of Simplicius .
In this fragment the area is calculated of some so-called Hippocratic lunes .
This was part of a research program to square the circle , that is, to construct a square with the same area as a circle.
The strategy, apparently, was to divide a circle into a number of crescent-shaped parts.
If it were possible to calculate the area of each of those parts, then the area of the circle as a whole would be known too.
Only much later was it proven (by Ferdinand von Lindemann , in 1882) that this approach had no chance of success, because the factor pi (π) is transcendental .
The number π is the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle, and also the ratio of the area to the square of the radius.
In the century after Hippocrates, at least four other mathematicians wrote their own Elements , steadily improving terminology and logical structure.
In this way, Hippocrates' pioneering work laid the foundation for Euclid 's Elements (c.
325 BC), which was to remain the standard geometry textbook for many centuries.
Hippocrates is believed to have originated the use of letters to refer to the geometric points and figures in a proposition, e.g., "triangle ABC" for a triangle with vertices at points A, B, and C.
Two other contributions by Hippocrates in the field of mathematics are noteworthy.
He found a way to tackle the problem of ' duplication of the cube ', that is, the problem of how to construct a cube root .
Like the quadrature of the circle, this was another of the so-called three great mathematical problems of antiquity.
Hippocrates also invented the technique of 'reduction', that is, to transform specific mathematical problems into a more general problem that is easier to solve.
The solution to the more general problem then automatically gives a solution to the original problem.
Astronomy  In the field of astronomy, Hippocrates tried to explain the phenomena of comets and the Milky Way .
His ideas have not been handed down very clearly, but he probably thought both were optical illusions, the result of refraction of solar light by moisture that was exhaled by, respectively, a putative planet near the Sun, and the stars.
The fact that Hippocrates thought that light rays originated in our eyes instead of in the object that is seen, adds to the unfamiliar character of his ideas.
Notes    ^  W.
W.
Rouse Ball , A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (1888) p.
36.
References  Ivor Bulmer-Thomas , 'Hippocrates of Chios', in: Dictionary of Scientific Biography , Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed.
(18 Volumes, New York 1970–1990) pp.
410–418.
Björnbo, 'Hippokrates', in: Paulys Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft, G.
Wissowa, ed.
(51 Volumes; 1894–1980) Vol.
8 (1913) col.
1780–1801.
External links     Wikiquote has quotations related to Hippocrates of Chios .
O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.
, "Hippocrates of Chios" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews  The Quadrature of the Circle and Hippocrates' Lunes at Convergence  Mesolabe Compass and Square Roots - Numberphile video explaining Hippocrates' mesolabe compass v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers  Aglaonice  Agrippa  Anaximander  Andronicus  Apollonius  Aratus  Aristarchus  Aristyllus  Attalus  Autolycus  Bion  Callippus  Cleomedes  Cleostratus  Conon  Eratosthenes  Euctemon  Eudoxus  Geminus  Heraclides  Hicetas  Hipparchus  Hippocrates of Chios  Hypsicles  Menelaus  Meton  Oenopides  Philip of Opus  Philolaus  Posidonius  Ptolemy  Pytheas  Seleucus  Sosigenes of Alexandria  Sosigenes the Peripatetic  Strabo  Thales  Theodosius  Theon of Alexandria  Theon of Smyrna  Timocharis  Works  Almagest  (Ptolemy)  Catasterismi  (Eratosthenes)  On Sizes and Distances  (Hipparchus)  On the Sizes and Distances  (Aristarchus)  On the Heavens  (Aristotle)  Instruments  Antikythera mechanism  Armillary sphere  Astrolabe  Dioptra  Equatorial ring  Gnomon  Mural instrument  Triquetrum  Concepts  Callippic cycle  Celestial spheres  Circle of latitude  Counter-Earth  Deferent and epicycle  Equant  Geocentrism  Heliocentrism  Hipparchic cycle  Inferior and superior planets  Metonic cycle  Octaeteris  Solstice  Spherical Earth  Sublunary sphere  Zodiac  Influences  Babylonian astronomy  Egyptian astronomy  Influenced  Medieval European science  Indian astronomy  Medieval Islamic astronomy  v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline)  Anaxagoras  Anthemius  Archytas  Aristaeus the Elder  Aristarchus  Aristotle  Apollonius  Archimedes  Autolycus  Bion  Bryson  Callippus  Carpus  Chrysippus  Cleomedes  Conon  Ctesibius  Democritus  Dicaearchus  Diocles  Diophantus  Dinostratus  Dionysodorus  Domninus  Eratosthenes  Eudemus  Euclid  Eudoxus  Eutocius  Geminus  Heliodorus  Heron  Hipparchus  Hippasus  Hippias  Hippocrates  Hypatia  Hypsicles  Isidore of Miletus  Leon  Marinus  Menaechmus  Menelaus  Metrodorus  Nicomachus  Nicomedes  Nicoteles  Oenopides  Pappus  Perseus  Philolaus  Philon  Philonides  Plato  Porphyry  Posidonius  Proclus  Ptolemy  Pythagoras  Serenus  Simplicius  Sosigenes  Sporus  Thales  Theaetetus  Theano  Theodorus  Theodosius  Theon of Alexandria  Theon of Smyrna  Thymaridas  Xenocrates  Zeno of Elea  Zeno of Sidon  Zenodorus  Treatises  Almagest  Archimedes Palimpsest  Arithmetica  Conics  (Apollonius)  Catoptrics  Data  (Euclid)  Elements  (Euclid)  Measurement of a Circle  On Conoids and Spheroids  On the Sizes and Distances  (Aristarchus)  On Sizes and Distances  (Hipparchus)  On the Moving Sphere  (Autolycus)  Optics  (Euclid)  On Spirals  On the Sphere and Cylinder  Ostomachion  Planisphaerium  Spherics  (Theodosius)  Spherics  (Menelaus)  The Quadrature of the Parabola  The Sand Reckoner  Problems  Constructible numbers  Angle trisection  Doubling the cube  Squaring the circle  Problem of Apollonius  Concepts and definitions  Angle  Central  Inscribed  Axiomatic system  Axiom  Chord  Circles of Apollonius  Apollonian circles  Apollonian gasket  Circumscribed circle  Commensurability  Diophantine equation  Doctrine of proportionality  Euclidean geometry  Golden ratio  Greek numerals  Incircle and excircles of a triangle  Method of exhaustion  Parallel postulate  Platonic solid  Lune of Hippocrates  Quadratrix of Hippias  Regular polygon  Straightedge and compass construction  Triangle center  Results In Elements  Angle bisector theorem  Exterior angle theorem  Euclidean algorithm  Euclid's theorem  Geometric mean theorem  Greek geometric algebra  Hinge theorem  Inscribed angle theorem  Intercept theorem  Intersecting chords theorem  Intersecting secants theorem  Law of cosines  Pons asinorum  Pythagorean theorem  Tangent-secant theorem  Thales's theorem  Theorem of the gnomon  Apollonius  Apollonius's theorem  Other  Aristarchus's inequality  Crossbar theorem  Heron's formula  Irrational numbers  Law of sines  Menelaus's theorem  Pappus's area theorem  Problem II.8 of Arithmetica  Ptolemy's inequality  Ptolemy's table of chords  Ptolemy's theorem  Spiral of Theodorus  Centers  Cyrene  Mouseion of Alexandria  Platonic Academy  Related  Ancient Greek astronomy  Attic numerals  Greek numerals  Latin translations of the 12th century  Non-Euclidean geometry  Philosophy of mathematics  Neusis construction  History of  A History of Greek Mathematics  by Thomas Heath  algebra  timeline  arithmetic  timeline  calculus  timeline  geometry  timeline  logic  timeline  mathematics  timeline  numbers  prehistoric counting  numeral systems  list  Other cultures  Arabian/Islamic  Babylonian  Chinese  Egyptian  Incan  Indian  Japanese   Ancient Greece portal •  Mathematics portal Authority control databases  International  VIAF  2  National  Germany  Academics  MathSciNet  zbMATH  People  Deutsche Biographie  Other  IdRef   Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hippocrates_of_Chios&oldid=1163060789 "Greek astronomer and mathematician (c.390–c.340 BC)  Not to be confused with Eudoxus of Cyzicus .
Eudoxus of Cnidus Born c.
390 BC Cnidus , Anatolia (now Yazıköy, Muğla , Turkey ) Died c.
340 BC Cnidus, Anatolia Known for Kampyle of Eudoxus Concentric spheres Scientific career Fields Mathematics Physics Geography Astronomy Medicine Philosophy   Eudoxus of Cnidus ( / ˈ juː d ə k s ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Εὔδοξος ὁ Κνίδιος , Eúdoxos ho Knídios ; c.
390 – c.
340 BC ) was an ancient Greek  astronomer , mathematician , doctor, and lawmaker.
He was a student of Archytas and Plato .
All of his original works are lost, though some fragments are preserved in Hipparchus ' Commentaries on the Phenomena of Aratus and Eudoxus .
Spherics by Theodosius of Bithynia may be based on a work by Eudoxus.
Life   Eudoxus, son of Aeschines, was born and died in Cnidus (also transliterated Knidos), a city on the southwest coast of Anatolia .
The years of Eudoxus' birth and death are not fully known but Diogenes Laërtius gave several biographical details, mentioned that Apollodorus said he reached his acme in the 103rd Olympiad (368– 365 BC ), and claimed he died in his 53rd year.
From this 19th century mathematical historians reconstructed dates of 408– 355 BC ,  but 20th century scholars found their choices contradictory and prefer a birth year of c.
390 BC .
His name Eudoxus means "honored" or "of good repute" ( εὔδοξος , from eu "good" and doxa "opinion, belief, fame", analogous to the Latin Benedictus ).
According to Diogenes Laërtius, crediting Callimachus ' Pinakes , Eudoxus studied mathematics with Archytas (of Tarentum , Magna Graecia ) and studied medicine with Philiston the Sicilian .
At the age of 23, he traveled with the physician Theomedon —who was his patron and possibly his lover  —to Athens to study with the followers of Socrates .
He spent two months there—living in Piraeus and walking 7 miles (11 km) each way every day to attend the Sophists ' lectures—then returned home to Cnidus.
His friends then paid to send him to Heliopolis , Egypt for 16 months, to pursue his study of astronomy and mathematics.
From Egypt, he then traveled north to Cyzicus , located on the south shore of the Sea of Marmara, the Propontis .
He traveled south to the court of Mausolus .
During his travels he gathered many students of his own.
Around 368 BC, Eudoxus returned to Athens with his students.
According to some sources,   c.
367 he assumed headship ( scholarch ) of the Academy during Plato's period in Syracuse, and taught Aristotle .
He eventually returned to his native Cnidus, where he served in the city assembly.
While in Cnidus, he built an observatory and continued writing and lecturing on theology , astronomy, and meteorology .
He had one son, Aristagoras, and three daughters, Actis, Philtis, and Delphis.
In mathematical astronomy, his fame is due to the introduction of the concentric spheres , and his early contributions to understanding the movement of the planets .
His work on proportions shows insight into irrational numbers and the linear continuum : it allows rigorous treatment of continuous quantities and not just whole numberss or even rational numbers .
When it was revived by Tartaglia and others in the 16th century, it became the basis for quantitative work in science, and inspired Richard Dedekind 's work on the real numbers .
Craters on Mars and the Moon are named in his honor.
An algebraic curve (the Kampyle of Eudoxus ) is also named after him.
Mathematics   Eudoxus is considered by some to be the greatest of classical Greek mathematicians, and in all Antiquity second only to Archimedes .
Eudoxus was probably the source for most of book V of Euclid's Elements .
He rigorously developed Antiphon 's method of exhaustion ,  a precursor to the integral calculus which was also used in a masterly way by Archimedes in the following century.
In applying the method, Eudoxus proved such mathematical statements as: areas of circles are to one another as the squares of their radii, volumes of spheres are to one another as the cubes of their radii, the volume of a pyramid is one-third the volume of a prism with the same base and altitude, and the volume of a cone is one-third that of the corresponding cylinder.
Eudoxus introduced the idea of non-quantified mathematical magnitude to describe and work with continuous geometrical entities such as lines, angles, areas and volumes, thereby avoiding the use of irrational numbers .
In doing so, he reversed a Pythagorean emphasis on number and arithmetic, focusing instead on geometrical concepts as the basis of rigorous mathematics.
Some Pythagoreans, such as Eudoxus's teacher Archytas , had believed that only arithmetic could provide a basis for proofs.
Induced by the need to understand and operate with incommensurable quantities , Eudoxus established what may have been the first deductive organization of mathematics on the basis of explicit axioms .
The change in focus by Eudoxus stimulated a divide in mathematics which lasted two thousand years.
In combination with a Greek intellectual attitude unconcerned with practical problems, there followed a significant retreat from the development of techniques in arithmetic and algebra.
The Pythagoreans had discovered that the diagonal of a square does not have a common unit of measurement with the sides of the square; this is the famous discovery that the square root of 2 cannot be expressed as the ratio of two integers.
This discovery had heralded the existence of incommensurable quantities beyond the integers and rational fractions, but at the same time it threw into question the idea of measurement and calculations in geometry as a whole.
For example, Euclid provides an elaborate proof of the Pythagorean theorem ( Elements I.47), by using addition of areas and only much later ( Elements VI.31) a simpler proof from similar triangles, which relies on ratios of line segments.
Ancient Greek mathematicians calculated not with quantities and equations as we do today; instead, a proportionality expressed a relationship between geometric magnitudes.
The ratio of two magnitudes was not a numerical value, as we think of it today; the ratio of two magnitudes was a primitive relationship between them.
Eudoxus was able to restore confidence in the use of proportionalities by providing an astounding definition for the meaning of the equality between two ratios.
This definition of proportion forms the subject of Euclid's Book V.
In Definition 5 of Euclid's Book V we read:  Magnitudes are said to be in the same ratio, the first to the second and the third to the fourth when, if any equimultiples whatever be taken of the first and third, and any equimultiples whatever of the second and fourth, the former equimultiples alike exceed, are alike equal to, or alike fall short of, the latter equimultiples respectively taken in corresponding order.
By using modern-day notation, this is clarified as follows.
If we take four quantities: a , b , c , and d , then the first and second have a ratio     a   /   b    {\displaystyle a/b}   ; similarly the third and fourth have a ratio     c   /   d    {\displaystyle c/d}   .
Now to say that     a   /   b  =  c   /   d    {\displaystyle a/b=c/d}   we do the following:
For any two arbitrary integers, m and n , form the equimultiples m · a and m · c of the first and third; likewise form the equimultiples n · b and n · d of the second and fourth.
If it happens that m · a > n · b , then we must also have m · c > n · d .
If it happens that m · a = n · b , then we must also have m · c = n · d .
Finally, if it happens that m · a < n · b , then we must also have m · c < n · d .
Notice that the definition depends on comparing the similar quantities m · a and n · b , and the similar quantities m · c and n · d , and does not depend on the existence of a common unit of measuring these quantities.
The complexity of the definition reflects the deep conceptual and methodological innovation involved.
It brings to mind the famous fifth postulate of Euclid concerning parallels, which is more extensive and complicated in its wording than the other postulates.
The Eudoxian definition of proportionality uses the quantifier, "for every ..." to harness the infinite and the infinitesimal, just as do the modern epsilon-delta definitions of limit and continuity.
Additionally, the Archimedean property stated as definition 4 of Euclid's book V is originally due not to Archimedes but to Eudoxus.
Astronomy   This section needs additional citations for verification .
( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  In ancient Greece , astronomy was a branch of mathematics; astronomers sought to create geometrical models that could imitate the appearances of celestial motions.
Identifying the astronomical work of Eudoxus as a separate category is therefore a modern convenience.
Some of Eudoxus's astronomical texts whose names have survived include:  Disappearances of the Sun , possibly on eclipses  Oktaeteris (Ὀκταετηρίς), on an eight-year lunisolar-Venus cycle of the calendar  Phaenomena (Φαινόμενα) and Enoptron (Ἔνοπτρον), on spherical astronomy , probably based on observations made by Eudoxus in Egypt and Cnidus  On Speeds , on planetary motions  We are fairly well informed about the contents of Phaenomena , for Eudoxus's prose text was the basis for a poem of the same name by Aratus .
Hipparchus quoted from the text of Eudoxus in his commentary on Aratus.
Eudoxan planetary models   Main article: Concentric spheres  A general idea of the content of On Speeds can be gleaned from Aristotle 's Metaphysics XII, 8, and a commentary by Simplicius of Cilicia (6th century AD) on De caelo , another work by Aristotle.
According to a story reported by Simplicius, Plato posed a question for Greek astronomers: "By the assumption of what uniform and orderly motions can the apparent motions of the planets be accounted for?"
Plato proposed that the seemingly chaotic wandering motions of the planets could be explained by combinations of uniform circular motions centered on a spherical Earth, apparently a novel idea in the 4th century BC.
In most modern reconstructions of the Eudoxan model, the Moon is assigned three spheres:  The outermost rotates westward once in 24 hours, explaining rising and setting.
The second rotates eastward once in a month, explaining the monthly motion of the Moon through the zodiac .
The third also completes its revolution in a month, but its axis is tilted at a slightly different angle, explaining motion in latitude (deviation from the ecliptic ), and the motion of the lunar nodes .
The Sun is also assigned three spheres.
The second completes its motion in a year instead of a month.
The inclusion of a third sphere implies that Eudoxus mistakenly believed that the Sun had motion in latitude.
Animation depicting Eudoxus's model of retrograde planetary motion.
The two innermost homocentric spheres of his model are represented as rings here, each turning with the same period but in opposite directions, moving the planet along a figure-eight curve, or hippopede.
Eudoxus's model of planetary motion.
Each of his homocentric spheres is represented here as a ring which rotates on the axis shown.
The outermost (yellow) sphere rotates once per day; the second (blue) describes the planet's motion through the zodiac; the third (green) and fourth (red) together move the planet along a figure-eight curve (or hippopede) to explain retrograde motion.
The five visible planets ( Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn ) are assigned four spheres each:  The outermost explains the daily motion.
The second explains the planet's motion through the zodiac.
The third and fourth together explain retrogradation , when a planet appears to slow down, then briefly reverse its motion through the zodiac.
By inclining the axes of the two spheres with respect to each other, and rotating them in opposite directions but with equal periods, Eudoxus could make a point on the inner sphere trace out a figure-eight shape, or hippopede .
Importance of Eudoxan system   Callippus , a Greek astronomer of the 4th century, added seven spheres to Eudoxus's original 27 (in addition to the planetary spheres, Eudoxus included a sphere for the fixed stars).
Aristotle described both systems, but insisted on adding "unrolling" spheres between each set of spheres to cancel the motions of the outer set.
Aristotle was concerned about the physical nature of the system; without unrollers, the outer motions would be transferred to the inner planets.
A major flaw in the Eudoxian system is its inability to explain changes in the brightness of planets as seen from Earth.
Because the spheres are concentric, planets will always remain at the same distance from Earth.
This problem was pointed out in Antiquity by Autolycus of Pitane .
Astronomers responded by introducing the deferent and epicycle , which caused a planet to vary its distance.
However, Eudoxus's importance to astronomy and in particular to Greek astronomy is considerable.
Ethics   Aristotle , in the Nicomachean Ethics ,  attributes to Eudoxus an argument in favor of hedonism —that is, that pleasure is the ultimate good that activity strives for.
According to Aristotle, Eudoxus put forward the following arguments for this position:  All things, rational and irrational, aim at pleasure; things aim at what they believe to be good; a good indication of what the chief good is would be the thing that most things aim at.
Similarly, pleasure's opposite—pain—is universally avoided, which provides additional support for the idea that pleasure is universally considered good.
People don't seek pleasure as a means to something else, but as an end in its own right.
Any other good that you can think of would be better if pleasure were added to it, and it is only by good that good can be increased.
Of all of the things that are good, happiness is peculiar for not being praised, which may show that it is the crowning good.
Greek mathematician (c.417–c.
369 BCE)  Theaetetus of Athens ( / ˌ θ iː ɪ ˈ t iː t ə s / ; Greek : Θεαίτητος  Theaítētos ; c.
417 – c.
369 BCE),  possibly the son of Euphronius of the Athenian  deme  Sunium , was a Greek mathematician.
His principal contributions were on irrational lengths, which was included in Book X of Euclid's Elements and proving that there are precisely five regular convex polyhedra .
A friend of Socrates and Plato , he is the central character in Plato's eponymous Socratic dialogue .
Theaetetus, like Plato, was a student of the Greek mathematician Theodorus of Cyrene .
Cyrene was a prosperous Greek colony on the coast of North Africa, in what is now Libya, on the eastern end of the Gulf of Sidra .
Theodorus had explored the theory of incommensurable quantities, and Theaetetus continued those studies with great enthusiasm; specifically, he classified various forms of irrational numbers according to the way they are expressed as square roots.
This theory is presented in great detail in Book X of Euclid's Elements .
Theaetetus was one of the few Greek mathematicians who was actually a native of Athens.
Most Greek mathematicians of antiquity came from the numerous Greek cities scattered around the Ionian coast, the Black Sea and the whole Mediterranean basin.
He evidently resembled Socrates in the snubness of his nose and bulging of his eyes.
This and most of what is known of him comes from Plato, who named a dialogue after him, the Theaetetus .
He apparently died from wounds and dysentery on his way home after fighting in an Athenian battle at Corinth , now presumed to have occurred in 369 BC; some scholars argue alternately for 391 BC as his date of death, the date of an earlier battle at Corinth.
The crater Theaetetus on the Moon is named after him.
Ancient Greek philosopher and polymath (384–322 BC)  For other uses, see Aristotle (disambiguation) .
Aristotle Ἀριστοτέλης Roman copy (in marble) of a Greek bronze bust of Aristotle by Lysippos ( c.
330 BC ), with modern alabaster mantle Born 384 BC Stagira , Chalcidian League Died 322 BC (aged 61–62) Chalcis , Euboea , Macedonian Empire Education Platonic Academy Notable work  Organon  Physics  Metaphysics  Nicomachean Ethics  Politics  Rhetoric  Poetics  Era Ancient Greek philosophy Region Western philosophy School  Peripatetic school  Notable students Alexander the Great , Theophrastus , Aristoxenus Main interests  Logic  Natural philosophy  Metaphysics  Ethics  Politics  Rhetoric  Poetics  Notable ideas Aristotelianism   Theoretical philosophy   Aristotelian logic , syllogism   Four causes   Genus and differentia   Hylomorphism , substance , essence , accident   Hypokeimenon   Potentiality and actuality   Theory of universals   Unmoved mover     Natural philosophy   Aristotelian biology   Aristotelian physics   Common sense   Eternity of the world   Five wits   Horror vacui   Theory of elements , aether   Rational animal     Practical philosophy   Aristotelian ethics   Catharsis   Deliberative , epideictic and forensic  rhetoric   Enthymeme and Paradeigma   Family as a model for the state   Golden mean   Kyklos   Magnanimity   Mimesis   Natural slavery   Intellectual virtues : sophia , episteme , nous , phronesis , techne   Three appeals : ethos , logos , pathos   Views on women     Aristotle  (384–322 BC) was an Ancient Greek  philosopher and polymath .
His writings cover a broad range of subjects spanning the natural sciences , philosophy , linguistics , economics , politics , psychology , and the arts .
As the founder of the Peripatetic school of philosophy in the Lyceum in Athens , he began the wider Aristotelian tradition that followed, which set the groundwork for the development of modern science .
Little is known about Aristotle's life.
He was born in the city of Stagira in northern Greece during the Classical period .
His father, Nicomachus , died when Aristotle was a child, and he was brought up by a guardian.
At 17 or 18, he joined Plato 's Academy in Athens and remained there until the age of 37 ( c.
347 BC ).
Shortly after Plato died, Aristotle left Athens and, at the request of Philip II of Macedon , tutored his son Alexander the Great beginning in 343 BC.
He established a library in the Lyceum, which helped him to produce many of his hundreds of books on papyrus  scrolls .
Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues for publication, only around a third of his original output has survived , none of it intended for publication.
Aristotle provided a complex synthesis of the various philosophies existing prior to him.
His teachings and methods of inquiry have had a significant impact across the world, and remain a subject of contemporary philosophical discussion.
Aristotle's views profoundly shaped medieval scholarship .
The influence of his physical science extended from late antiquity and the Early Middle Ages into the Renaissance , and was not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics were developed.
He influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophies during the Middle Ages, as well as Christian theology , especially the Neoplatonism of the Early Church and the scholastic tradition of the Catholic Church .
Aristotle was revered among medieval Muslim scholars as "The First Teacher", and among medieval Christians like Thomas Aquinas as simply "The Philosopher", while the poet Dante called him "the master of those who know".
His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, and were studied by medieval scholars such as Peter Abelard and Jean Buridan .
Aristotle's influence on logic continued well into the 19th century.
In addition, his ethics , although always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics .
Life  In general, the details of Aristotle's life are not well-established.
The biographies written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points.
Aristotle was born in 384 BC  in Stagira , Chalcidice ,  about 55 km (34 miles) east of modern-day Thessaloniki .
His father, Nicomachus , was the personal physician to King Amyntas of Macedon .
While he was young, Aristotle learned about biology and medical information, which was taught by his father.
Both of Aristotle's parents died when he was about thirteen, and Proxenus of Atarneus became his guardian.
Although little information about Aristotle's childhood has survived, he probably spent some time within the Macedonian palace, making his first connections with the Macedonian monarchy .
School of Aristotle in Mieza , Macedonia, Greece .
At the age of seventeen or eighteen, Aristotle moved to Athens to continue his education at Plato's Academy .
He probably experienced the Eleusinian Mysteries as he wrote when describing the sights one viewed at the Eleusinian Mysteries, "to experience is to learn" .
Aristotle remained in Athens for nearly twenty years before leaving in 348/47 BC.
The traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the Academy's direction after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus , although it is possible that he feared the anti-Macedonian sentiments in Athens at that time and left before Plato died.
Aristotle then accompanied Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor .
After the death of Hermias, Aristotle travelled with his pupil Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos , where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island and its sheltered lagoon.
While in Lesbos, Aristotle married Pythias , either Hermias's adoptive daughter or niece.
They had a daughter, whom they also named Pythias.
In 343 BC, Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander .
"Aristotle tutoring Alexander" by Jean Leon Gerome Ferris .
Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal Academy of Macedon .
During Aristotle's time in the Macedonian court, he gave lessons not only to Alexander but also to two other future kings: Ptolemy and Cassander .
Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest, and Aristotle's own attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric .
In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be "a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants".
By 335 BC, Aristotle had returned to Athens, establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum .
Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years.
While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira.
They had a son whom Aristotle named after his father, Nicomachus .
If the Suda – an uncritical compilation from the Middle Ages – is accurate, he may also have had an erômenos , Palaephatus of Abydus .
Portrait bust of Aristotle; an Imperial Roman (1st or 2nd century AD) copy of a lost bronze sculpture made by Lysippos .
This period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, is when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works.
He wrote many dialogues, of which only fragments have survived.
Those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students.
His most important treatises include Physics , Metaphysics , Nicomachean Ethics , Politics , On the Soul and Poetics .
Aristotle studied and made significant contributions to "logic, metaphysics, mathematics, physics, biology, botany, ethics, politics, agriculture, medicine, dance, and theatre."
Near the end of his life, Alexander and Aristotle became estranged over Alexander's relationship with Persia and Persians.
A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death, but the only evidence of this is an unlikely claim made some six years after the death.
Following Alexander's death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled.
In 322 BC, Demophilus and Eurymedon the Hierophant reportedly denounced Aristotle for impiety,  prompting him to flee to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, on Euboea , at which occasion he was said to have stated: "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy"    – a reference to Athens's trial and execution of Socrates .
He died in Chalcis, Euboea    of natural causes later that same year, having named his student Antipater as his chief executor and leaving a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife.
Theoretical philosophy  Logic  Main article: Term logic  Further information: Non-Aristotelian logic  With the Prior Analytics , Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic,  and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th-century advances in mathematical logic .
Kant stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that with Aristotle, logic reached its completion.
Organon  Main article: Organon  One of Aristotle's types of syllogism    In words  In terms   In equations     All men are mortal.
All Greeks are men.
∴ All Greeks are mortal.
M a P S a M S a P    What is today called Aristotelian logic with its types of syllogism (methods of logical argument),  Aristotle himself would have labelled "analytics".
The term "logic" he reserved to mean dialectics .
Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers.
The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into a set of six books called the Organon around 40 BC by Andronicus of Rhodes or others among his followers.
The books are:  Categories  On Interpretation  Prior Analytics  Posterior Analytics  Topics  On Sophistical Refutations  Plato (left) and Aristotle in Raphael 's 1509 fresco, The School of Athens .
Aristotle holds his Nicomachean Ethics and gestures to the earth, representing his view in immanent realism, whilst Plato gestures to the heavens, indicating his Theory of Forms, and holds his Timaeus .
The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings.
It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the Categories, the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation , to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms (in the Analytics )   and dialectics (in the Topics and Sophistical Refutations ).
The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu : the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning.
The Rhetoric is not conventionally included, but it states that it relies on the Topics .
Metaphysics  Main article: Metaphysics (Aristotle)  The word "metaphysics" appears to have been coined by the first century AD editor who assembled various small selections of Aristotle's works to the treatise we know by the name Metaphysics .
Aristotle called it "first philosophy", and distinguished it from mathematics and natural science (physics) as the contemplative ( theoretikē ) philosophy which is "theological" and studies the divine.
He wrote in his Metaphysics (1026a16):  if there were no other independent things besides the composite natural ones, the study of nature would be the primary kind of knowledge; but if there is some motionless independent thing, the knowledge of this precedes it and is first philosophy, and it is universal in just this way , because it is first.
And it belongs to this sort of philosophy to study being as being, both what it is and what belongs to it just by virtue of being.
Substance  Further information: Hylomorphism  Aristotle examines the concepts of substance ( ousia ) and essence ( to ti ên einai , "the what it was to be") in his Metaphysics (Book VII), and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form, a philosophical theory called hylomorphism .
In Book VIII, he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum , or the stuff of which it is composed.
For example, the matter of a house is the bricks, stones, timbers, etc., or whatever constitutes the potential house, while the form of the substance is the actual house, namely 'covering for bodies and chattels' or any other differentia that let us define something as a house.
The formula that gives the components is the account of the matter, and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form.
Immanent realism  Main article: Aristotle's theory of universals  Plato 's forms exist as universals , like the ideal form of an apple.
For Aristotle, both matter and form belong to the individual thing ( hylomorphism ).
Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal .
Aristotle's ontology places the universal ( katholou ) in particulars ( kath' hekaston ), things in the world, whereas for Plato the universal is a separately existing form which actual things imitate.
For Aristotle, "form" is still what phenomena are based on, but is "instantiated" in a particular substance.
Plato argued that all things have a universal form , which could be either a property or a relation to other things.
When one looks at an apple, for example, one sees an apple, and one can also analyse a form of an apple.
In this distinction, there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple.
Moreover, one can place an apple next to a book, so that one can speak of both the book and apple as being next to each other.
Plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things.
For example, it is possible that there is no particular good in existence, but "good" is still a proper universal form.
Aristotle disagreed with Plato on this point, arguing that all universals are instantiated at some period of time, and that there are no universals that are unattached to existing things.
In addition, Aristotle disagreed with Plato about the location of universals.
Where Plato spoke of the forms as existing separately from the things that participate in them, Aristotle maintained that universals exist within each thing on which each universal is predicated.
So, according to Aristotle, the form of apple exists within each apple, rather than in the world of the forms.
Potentiality and actuality  Concerning the nature of change ( kinesis ) and its causes, as he outlines in his Physics and On Generation and Corruption ( 319b–320a), he distinguishes coming-to-be ( genesis , also translated as 'generation') from:  growth and diminution, which is change in quantity;  locomotion, which is change in space; and  alteration, which is change in quality.
Aristotle argued that a capability like playing the flute could be acquired – the potential made actual – by learning.
Coming-to-be is a change where the substrate of the thing that has undergone the change has itself changed.
In that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality ( dynamis ) and actuality ( entelecheia ) in association with the matter and the form.
Referring to potentiality, this is what a thing is capable of doing or being acted upon if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else.
For example, the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially ( dynamei ) a plant, and if it is not prevented by something, it will become a plant.
Potentially, beings can either 'act' ( poiein ) or 'be acted upon' ( paschein ), which can be either innate or learned.
For example, the eyes possess the potentiality of sight (innate – being acted upon), while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning (exercise – acting).
Actuality is the fulfilment of the end of the potentiality.
Because the end ( telos ) is the principle of every change, and potentiality exists for the sake of the end, actuality, accordingly, is the end.
Referring then to the previous example, it can be said that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do.
For that for the sake of which ( to hou heneka ) a thing is, is its principle, and the becoming is for the sake of the end; and the actuality is the end, and it is for the sake of this that the potentiality is acquired.
For animals do not see in order that they may have sight, but they have sight that they may see.
In summary, the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities, which is also a final cause or end.
Then Aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula, in time and in substantiality.
With this definition of the particular substance (i.e., matter and form), Aristotle tries to solve the problem of the unity of the beings, for example, "what is it that makes a man one"?
Since, according to Plato there are two Ideas: animal and biped, how then is man a unity?
However, according to Aristotle, the potential being (matter) and the actual one (form) are one and the same.
Epistemology  Aristotle's immanent realism means his epistemology is based on the study of things that exist or happen in the world, and rises to knowledge of the universal, whereas for Plato epistemology begins with knowledge of universal Forms (or ideas) and descends to knowledge of particular imitations of these.
Aristotle uses induction from examples alongside deduction , whereas Plato relies on deduction from a priori principles.
Natural philosophy  Aristotle's "natural philosophy" spans a wide range of natural phenomena including those now covered by physics, biology and other natural sciences.
In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences.
Aristotle's work encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry.
Aristotle makes philosophy in the broad sense coextensive with reasoning, which he also would describe as "science".
However, his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the term "scientific method".
For Aristotle, "all science ( dianoia ) is either practical, poetical or theoretical" ( Metaphysics 1025b25).
His practical science includes ethics and politics; his poetical science means the study of fine arts including poetry; his theoretical science covers physics, mathematics and metaphysics.
Physics  The four classical elements (fire, air, water, earth) of Empedocles and Aristotle illustrated with a burning log.
The log releases all four elements as it is destroyed.
Main article: Aristotelian physics  Five elements  Main article: Classical element  In his On Generation and Corruption , Aristotle related each of the four elements proposed earlier by Empedocles , earth , water , air , and fire , to two of the four sensible qualities, hot, cold, wet, and dry.
In the Empedoclean scheme, all matter was made of the four elements, in differing proportions.
Aristotle's scheme added the heavenly aether , the divine substance of the heavenly spheres , stars and planets.
Aristotle's elements    Element  Hot / Cold  Wet / Dry  Motion  Modern state of matter    Earth  Cold  Dry  Down  Solid    Water  Cold  Wet  Down  Liquid    Air  Hot  Wet  Up  Gas    Fire  Hot  Dry  Up  Plasma    Aether  (divine substance)  —  Circular (in heavens)  Vacuum   Motion  Further information: History of classical mechanics  Aristotle describes two kinds of motion: "violent" or "unnatural motion", such as that of a thrown stone, in the Physics (254b10), and "natural motion", such as of a falling object, in On the Heavens (300a20).
In violent motion, as soon as the agent stops causing it, the motion stops also: in other words, the natural state of an object is to be at rest,   since Aristotle does not address friction .
With this understanding, it can be observed that, as Aristotle stated, heavy objects (on the ground, say) require more force to make them move; and objects pushed with greater force move faster.
This would imply the equation        F  =  m  v    {\displaystyle F=mv}   ,  incorrect in modern physics.
Natural motion depends on the element concerned: the aether naturally moves in a circle around the heavens,  while the 4 Empedoclean elements move vertically up (like fire, as is observed) or down (like earth) towards their natural resting places.
Aristotle's laws of motion.
In Physics he states that objects fall at a speed proportional to their weight and inversely proportional to the density of the fluid they are immersed in.
This is a correct approximation for objects in Earth's gravitational field moving in air or water.
In the Physics (215a25), Aristotle effectively states a quantitative law, that the speed, v, of a falling body is proportional (say, with constant c) to its weight, W, and inversely proportional to the density,  ρ, of the fluid in which it is falling:;         v  =  c    W  ρ      {\displaystyle v=c{\frac {W}{\rho }}}    Aristotle implies that in a vacuum the speed of fall would become infinite, and concludes from this apparent absurdity that a vacuum is not possible.
Opinions have varied on whether Aristotle intended to state quantitative laws.
Henri Carteron held the "extreme view"  that Aristotle's concept of force was basically qualitative,  but other authors reject this.
Archimedes corrected Aristotle's theory that bodies move towards their natural resting places; metal boats can float if they displace enough water ; floating depends in Archimedes' scheme on the mass and volume of the object, not, as Aristotle thought, its elementary composition.
Aristotle's writings on motion remained influential until the Early Modern period.
John Philoponus (in Late antiquity ) and Galileo (in Early modern period ) are said to have shown by experiment that Aristotle's claim that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect.
A contrary opinion is given by Carlo Rovelli , who argues that Aristotle's physics of motion is correct within its domain of validity, that of objects in the Earth 's gravitational field immersed in a fluid such as air.
In this system, heavy bodies in steady fall indeed travel faster than light ones (whether friction is ignored, or not  ), and they do fall more slowly in a denser medium.
Newton's "forced" motion corresponds to Aristotle's "violent" motion with its external agent, but Aristotle's assumption that the agent's effect stops immediately it stops acting (e.g., the ball leaves the thrower's hand) has awkward consequences: he has to suppose that surrounding fluid helps to push the ball along to make it continue to rise even though the hand is no longer acting on it, resulting in the Medieval theory of impetus .
Four causes  Main article: Four causes  Aristotle argued by analogy with woodwork that a thing takes its form from four causes : in the case of a table, the wood used ( material cause ), its design ( formal cause ), the tools and techniques used ( efficient cause ), and its decorative or practical purpose ( final cause ).
Aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active factors.
His term aitia is traditionally translated as "cause", but it does not always refer to temporal sequence; it might be better translated as "explanation", but the traditional rendering will be employed here.
Material cause describes the material out of which something is composed.
Thus the material cause of a table is wood.
It is not about action.
It does not mean that one domino knocks over another domino.
The formal cause is its form, i.e., the arrangement of that matter.
It tells one what a thing is, that a thing is determined by the definition, form, pattern, essence, whole, synthesis or archetype.
It embraces the account of causes in terms of fundamental principles or general laws, as the whole (i.e., macrostructure) is the cause of its parts, a relationship known as the whole-part causation.
Plainly put, the formal cause is the idea in the mind of the sculptor that brings the sculpture into being.
A simple example of the formal cause is the mental image or idea that allows an artist, architect, or engineer to create a drawing.
The efficient cause is "the primary source", or that from which the change under consideration proceeds.
It identifies 'what makes of what is made and what causes change of what is changed' and so suggests all sorts of agents, non-living or living, acting as the sources of change or movement or rest.
Representing the current understanding of causality as the relation of cause and effect, this covers the modern definitions of "cause" as either the agent or agency or particular events or states of affairs.
In the case of two dominoes, when the first is knocked over it causes the second also to fall over.
In the case of animals, this agency is a combination of how it develops from the egg , and how its body functions .
The final cause ( telos ) is its purpose, the reason why a thing exists or is done, including both purposeful and instrumental actions and activities.
The final cause is the purpose or function that something is supposed to serve.
This covers modern ideas of motivating causes, such as volition.
In the case of living things, it implies adaptation to a particular way of life.
Optics  Further information: History of optics  Aristotle describes experiments in optics using a camera obscura in Problems , book 15.
The apparatus consisted of a dark chamber with a small aperture that let light in.
With it, he saw that whatever shape he made the hole, the sun's image always remained circular.
He also noted that increasing the distance between the aperture and the image surface magnified the image.
Chance and spontaneity  Further information: Accident (philosophy)  According to Aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause such as simple necessity.
Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things , "from what is spontaneous".
There is also more a specific kind of chance, which Aristotle names "luck", that only applies to people's moral choices.
Astronomy  Further information: History of astronomy  In astronomy , Aristotle refuted Democritus 's claim that the Milky Way was made up of "those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays," pointing out partly correctly that if "the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun, then...
the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them."
He also wrote descriptions of comets, including the Great Comet of 371 BC .
Geology and natural sciences  Further information: History of geology  Aristotle noted that the ground level of the Aeolian islands changed before a volcanic eruption .
Aristotle was one of the first people to record any geological observations.
He stated that geological change was too slow to be observed in one person's lifetime.
The geologist Charles Lyell noted that Aristotle described such change, including "lakes that had dried up" and "deserts that had become watered by rivers", giving as examples the growth of the Nile delta since the time of Homer , and "the upheaving of one of the Aeolian islands , previous to a volcanic eruption ."'
Meteorologica lends its name to the modern study of meteorology, but its modern usage diverges from the content of Aristotle's ancient treatise on meteors .
The ancient Greeks did use the term for a range of atmospheric phenomena, but also for earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
Aristotle proposed that the cause of earthquakes was a gas or vapor ( anathymiaseis ) that was trapped inside the earth and trying to escape, following other Greek authors Anaxagoras , Empedocles and Democritus .
Aristotle also made many observations about the hydrologic cycle.
For example, he made some of the earliest observations about desalination: he observed early – and correctly – that when seawater is heated, freshwater evaporates and that the oceans are then replenished by the cycle of rainfall and river runoff ("I have proved by experiment that salt water evaporated forms fresh and the vapor does not when it condenses condense into sea water again.")
Biology  Main article: Aristotle's biology  Among many pioneering zoological observations, Aristotle described the reproductive hectocotyl arm of the octopus (bottom left).
Empirical research  Aristotle was the first person to study biology systematically,  and biology forms a large part of his writings.
He spent two years observing and describing the zoology of Lesbos and the surrounding seas, including in particular the Pyrrha lagoon in the centre of Lesbos.
His data in History of Animals , Generation of Animals , Movement of Animals , and Parts of Animals are assembled from his own observations,  statements given by people with specialized knowledge, such as beekeepers and fishermen, and less accurate accounts provided by travellers from overseas.
His apparent emphasis on animals rather than plants is a historical accident: his works on botany have been lost, but two books on plants by his pupil Theophrastus have survived.
Aristotle reports on the sea-life visible from observation on Lesbos and the catches of fishermen.
He describes the catfish , electric ray , and frogfish in detail, as well as cephalopods such as the octopus and paper nautilus .
His description of the hectocotyl arm of cephalopods, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until the 19th century.
He gives accurate descriptions of the four-chambered fore-stomachs of ruminants ,  and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark .
He notes that an animal's structure is well matched to function so birds like the heron (which live in marshes with soft mud and live by catching fish) have a long neck, long legs, and a sharp spear-like beak, whereas ducks that swim have short legs and webbed feet.
Darwin , too, noted these sorts of differences between similar kinds of animal, but unlike Aristotle used the data to come to the theory of evolution .
Aristotle's writings can seem to modern readers close to implying evolution, but while Aristotle was aware that new mutations or hybridizations could occur, he saw these as rare accidents.
For Aristotle, accidents, like heat waves in winter, must be considered distinct from natural causes.
He was thus critical of Empedocles's materialist theory of a "survival of the fittest" origin of living things and their organs, and ridiculed the idea that accidents could lead to orderly results.
To put his views into modern terms, he nowhere says that different species can have a common ancestor , or that one kind can change into another , or that kinds can become extinct .
Scientific style  Aristotle inferred growth laws from his observations on animals, including that brood size decreases with body mass, whereas gestation period increases.
He was correct in these predictions, at least for mammals: data are shown for mouse and elephant.
Aristotle did not do experiments in the modern sense.
He used the ancient Greek term pepeiramenoi to mean observations, or at most investigative procedures like dissection.
In Generation of Animals , he finds a fertilized hen's egg of a suitable stage and opens it to see the embryo's heart beating inside.
Instead, he practiced a different style of science: systematically gathering data, discovering patterns common to whole groups of animals, and inferring possible causal explanations from these.
This style is common in modern biology when large amounts of data become available in a new field, such as genomics .
It does not result in the same certainty as experimental science, but it sets out testable hypotheses and constructs a narrative explanation of what is observed.
In this sense, Aristotle's biology is scientific.
From the data he collected and documented, Aristotle inferred quite a number of rules relating the life-history features of the live-bearing tetrapods (terrestrial placental mammals) that he studied.
Among these correct predictions are the following.
Brood size decreases with (adult) body mass, so that an elephant has fewer young (usually just one) per brood than a mouse.
Lifespan increases with gestation period , and also with body mass, so that elephants live longer than mice, have a longer period of gestation, and are heavier.
As a final example, fecundity decreases with lifespan, so long-lived kinds like elephants have fewer young in total than short-lived kinds like mice.
Classification of living things  Further information: Scala naturae  Aristotle recorded that the embryo of a dogfish was attached by a cord to a kind of placenta (the yolk sac ), like a higher animal; this formed an exception to the linear scale from highest to lowest.
Aristotle distinguished about 500 species of animals ,   arranging these in the History of Animals in a graded scale of perfection, a nonreligious version of the scala naturae , with man at the top.
His system had eleven grades of animal, from highest potential to lowest, expressed in their form at birth: the highest gave live birth to hot and wet creatures, the lowest laid cold, dry mineral-like eggs.
Animals came above plants , and these in turn were above minerals.
He grouped what the modern zoologist would call vertebrates as the hotter "animals with blood", and below them the colder invertebrates as "animals without blood".
Those with blood were divided into the live-bearing ( mammals ), and the egg-laying ( birds , reptiles , fish ).
Those without blood were insects, crustacea (non-shelled – cephalopods, and shelled ) and the hard-shelled molluscs ( bivalves and gastropods ).
He recognised that animals did not exactly fit into a linear scale, and noted various exceptions, such as that sharks had a placenta like the tetrapods.
To a modern biologist, the explanation, not available to Aristotle, is convergent evolution .
Philosophers of science have generally concluded that Aristotle was not interested in taxonomy,   but zoologists who studied this question in the early 21st century think otherwise.
He believed that purposive final causes guided all natural processes; this teleological view justified his observed data as an expression of formal design.
Aristotle's Scala naturae (highest to lowest)  Group  Examples (given by Aristotle)  Blood  Legs  Souls (Rational, Sensitive, Vegetative)  Qualities ( Hot – Cold , Wet – Dry )   Man  Man  with blood  2 legs  R, S, V  Hot , Wet    Live-bearing tetrapods  Cat, hare  with blood  4 legs  S, V  Hot , Wet    Cetaceans  Dolphin , whale  with blood  none  S, V  Hot , Wet    Birds  Bee-eater , nightjar  with blood  2 legs  S, V  Hot , Wet , except Dry eggs   Egg-laying tetrapods  Chameleon , crocodile  with blood  4 legs  S, V  Cold , Wet except scales, eggs   Snakes  Water snake, Ottoman viper  with blood  none  S, V  Cold , Wet except scales, eggs   Egg-laying fishes  Sea bass , parrotfish  with blood  none  S, V  Cold , Wet , including eggs   (Among the egg-laying fishes): placental selachians  Shark , skate  with blood  none  S, V  Cold , Wet , but placenta like tetrapods   Crustaceans  Shrimp , crab  without  many legs  S, V  Cold , Wet except shell   Cephalopods  Squid , octopus  without  tentacles  S, V  Cold , Wet    Hard-shelled animals  Cockle , trumpet snail  without  none  S, V  Cold , Dry (mineral shell)   Larva-bearing insects  Ant , cicada  without  6 legs  S, V  Cold , Dry    Spontaneously generating  Sponges , worms  without  none  S, V  Cold , Wet or Dry , from earth   Plants  Fig  without  none  V  Cold , Dry    Minerals  Iron  without  none  none  Cold , Dry   Psychology  Soul  Further information: On the Soul  Aristotle proposed a three-part structure for souls of plants, animals, and humans, making humans unique in having all three types of soul.
Aristotle's psychology , given in his treatise On the Soul ( peri psychēs ), posits three kinds of soul ("psyches"): the vegetative soul, the sensitive soul, and the rational soul.
Humans have all three.
The vegetative soul is concerned with growth and nourishment.
The sensitive soul experiences sensations and movement.
The unique part of the human, rational soul is its ability to receive forms of other things and to compare them using the nous (intellect) and logos (reason).
For Aristotle, the soul is the form of a living being.
Because all beings are composites of form and matter, the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings, e.g.
the ability to initiate movement (or in the case of plants, growth and transformations, which Aristotle considers types of movement).
In contrast to earlier philosophers, but in accordance with the Egyptians, he placed the rational soul in the heart, rather than the brain.
Notable is Aristotle's division of sensation and thought, which generally differed from the concepts of previous philosophers, with the exception of Alcmaeon .
In On the Soul , Aristotle famously criticizes Plato's theory of the soul and develops his own in response.
The first criticism is against Plato's view of the soul in the Timaeus that the soul takes up space and is able to come into physical contact with bodies.
20th-century scholarship overwhelmingly opposed Aristotle's interpretation of Plato and maintained that he had misunderstood him.
Today's scholars have tended to re-assess Aristotle's interpretation and been more positive about it.
Aristotle's other criticism is that Plato's view of reincarnation entails that it is possible for a soul and its body to be mis-matched; in principle, Aristotle alleges, any soul can go with any body, according to Plato's theory.
Aristotle's claim that the soul is the form of a living being eliminates that possibility and thus rules out reincarnation.
Memory  According to Aristotle in On the Soul , memory is the ability to hold a perceived experience in the mind and to distinguish between the internal "appearance" and an occurrence in the past.
In other words, a memory is a mental picture ( phantasm ) that can be recovered.
Aristotle believed an impression is left on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes several changes in order to make a memory.
A memory occurs when stimuli such as sights or sounds are so complex that the nervous system cannot receive all the impressions at once.
These changes are the same as those involved in the operations of sensation, Aristotelian ' common sense ' , and thinking.
Aristotle uses the term 'memory' for the actual retaining of an experience in the impression that can develop from sensation, and for the intellectual anxiety that comes with the impression because it is formed at a particular time and processing specific contents.
Memory is of the past, prediction is of the future, and sensation is of the present.
Retrieval of impressions cannot be performed suddenly.
A transitional channel is needed and located in past experiences, both for previous experience and present experience.
Because Aristotle believes people receive all kinds of sense perceptions and perceive them as impressions, people are continually weaving together new impressions of experiences.
To search for these impressions, people search the memory itself.
Within the memory, if one experience is offered instead of a specific memory, that person will reject this experience until they find what they are looking for.
Recollection occurs when one retrieved experience naturally follows another.
If the chain of "images" is needed, one memory will stimulate the next.
When people recall experiences, they stimulate certain previous experiences until they reach the one that is needed.
Recollection is thus the self-directed activity of retrieving the information stored in a memory impression.
Only humans can remember impressions of intellectual activity, such as numbers and words.
Animals that have perception of time can retrieve memories of their past observations.
Remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed.
Senses, perception, memory, dreams, action in Aristotle's psychology.
Impressions are stored in the sensorium (the heart), linked by his laws of association (similarity, contrast, and contiguity ).
Aristotle believed the chain of thought, which ends in recollection of certain impressions, was connected systematically in relationships such as similarity, contrast, and contiguity , described in his laws of association .
Aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within the mind.
A force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience.
According to Aristotle, association is the power innate in a mental state, which operates upon the unexpressed remains of former experiences, allowing them to rise and be recalled.
Dreams  Further information: Dream § Other  Aristotle describes sleep in On Sleep and Wakefulness .
Sleep takes place as a result of overuse of the senses  or of digestion,  so it is vital to the body.
While a person is asleep, the critical activities, which include thinking, sensing, recalling and remembering, do not function as they do during wakefulness.
Since a person cannot sense during sleep, they cannot have desire, which is the result of sensation.
However, the senses are able to work during sleep,  albeit differently,  unless they are weary.
Dreams do not involve actually sensing a stimulus.
In dreams, sensation is still involved, but in an altered manner.
Aristotle explains that when a person stares at a moving stimulus such as the waves in a body of water, and then looks away, the next thing they look at appears to have a wavelike motion.
When a person perceives a stimulus and the stimulus is no longer the focus of their attention, it leaves an impression.
When the body is awake and the senses are functioning properly, a person constantly encounters new stimuli to sense and so the impressions of previously perceived stimuli are ignored.
However, during sleep the impressions made throughout the day are noticed as there are no new distracting sensory experiences.
So, dreams result from these lasting impressions.
Since impressions are all that are left and not the exact stimuli, dreams do not resemble the actual waking experience.
During sleep, a person is in an altered state of mind.
Aristotle compares a sleeping person to a person who is overtaken by strong feelings toward a stimulus.
For example, a person who has a strong infatuation with someone may begin to think they see that person everywhere because they are so overtaken by their feelings.
Since a person sleeping is in a suggestible state and unable to make judgements, they become easily deceived by what appears in their dreams, like the infatuated person.
This leads the person to believe the dream is real, even when the dreams are absurd in nature.
In De Anima iii 3, Aristotle ascribes the ability to create, to store, and to recall images in the absence of perception to the faculty of imagination, phantasia .
One component of Aristotle's theory of dreams disagrees with previously held beliefs.
He claimed that dreams are not foretelling and not sent by a divine being.
Aristotle reasoned naturalistically that instances in which dreams do resemble future events are simply coincidences.
Aristotle claimed that a dream is first established by the fact that the person is asleep when they experience it.
If a person had an image appear for a moment after waking up or if they see something in the dark it is not considered a dream because they were awake when it occurred.
Secondly, any sensory experience that is perceived while a person is asleep does not qualify as part of a dream.
For example, if, while a person is sleeping, a door shuts and in their dream they hear a door is shut, this sensory experience is not part of the dream.
Lastly, the images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of waking sensory experiences.
Practical philosophy  Aristotle's practical philosophy covers areas such as ethics , politics , economics , and rhetoric .
Virtues and their accompanying vices    Too little  Virtuous mean  Too much   Humbleness  High-mindedness  Vainglory   Lack of purpose  Right ambition  Over-ambition   Spiritlessness  Good temper  Irascibility   Rudeness  Civility  Obsequiousness   Cowardice  Courage  Rashness   Insensibility  Self-control  Intemperance   Sarcasm  Sincerity  Boastfulness   Boorishness  Wit  Buffoonery   Shamelessness  Modesty  Shyness   Callousness  Just resentment  Spitefulness   Pettiness  Generosity  Vulgarity   Meanness  Liberality  Wastefulness  Ethics  Main article: Aristotelian ethics  Aristotle considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study, i.e., one aimed at becoming good and doing good rather than knowing for its own sake.
He wrote several treatises on ethics, most notably including the Nicomachean Ethics .
Aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function ( ergon ) of a thing.
An eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see, because the proper function of an eye is sight.
Aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans, and that this function must be an activity of the psuchē ( soul ) in accordance with reason ( logos ).
Aristotle identified such an optimum activity (the virtuous mean, between the accompanying vices of excess or deficiency  ) of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action, eudaimonia , generally translated as "happiness" or sometimes "well-being".
To have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character ( ēthikē  aretē ), often translated as moral or ethical virtue or excellence.
Aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated not deliberately, but by teachers, and experience, leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things.
When the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom ( phronesis ) and their intellect ( nous ) can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue, the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker, or in other words, a philosopher.
Politics  Main article: Politics (Aristotle)  In addition to his works on ethics, which address the individual, Aristotle addressed the city in his work titled Politics .
Aristotle considered the city to be a natural community.
Moreover, he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family, which in turn is prior to the individual, "for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part".
He famously stated that "man is by nature a political animal" and argued that humanity's defining factor among others in the animal kingdom is its rationality.
Aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine, and as a collection of parts none of which can exist without the others.
Aristotle's conception of the city is organic, and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner.
Aristotle's classifications of political constitutions.
The common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from Aristotle's understanding.
Although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires, the natural community according to Aristotle was the city ( polis ) which functions as a political "community" or "partnership" ( koinōnia ).
The aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability, but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life, and to perform beautiful acts: "The political partnership must be regarded, therefore, as being for the sake of noble actions, not for the sake of living together."
This is distinguished from modern approaches, beginning with social contract theory, according to which individuals leave the state of nature because of "fear of violent death" or its "inconveniences".
In Protrepticus , the character 'Aristotle' states:    For we all agree that the most excellent man should rule, i.e., the supreme by nature, and that the law rules and alone is authoritative; but the law is a kind of intelligence, i.e.
a discourse based on intelligence.
And again, what standard do we have, what criterion of good things, that is more precise than the intelligent man?
For all that this man will choose, if the choice is based on his knowledge, are good things and their contraries are bad.
And since everybody chooses most of all what conforms to their own proper dispositions (a just man choosing to live justly, a man with bravery to live bravely, likewise a self-controlled man to live with self-control), it is clear that the intelligent man will choose most of all to be intelligent; for this is the function of that capacity.
Hence it's evident that, according to the most authoritative judgment, intelligence is supreme among goods.
As Plato's disciple Aristotle was rather critical concerning democracy and, following the outline of certain ideas from Plato's Statesman , he developed a coherent theory of integrating various forms of power into a so-called mixed state:  It is … constitutional to take … from oligarchy that offices are to be elected, and from democracy that this is not to be on a property-qualification.
This then is the mode of the mixture; and the mark of a good mixture of democracy and oligarchy is when it is possible to speak of the same constitution as a democracy and as an oligarchy.
— Aristotle.
Politics , Book 4, 1294b.10–18 Aristotle's views on women influenced later Western philosophers , who quoted him as an authority until the end of the Middle Ages , but these views have been controversial in modern times.
Aristotle's analysis of procreation describes an active, ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert, passive female element.
The biological differences are a result of the fact that the female body is well-suited for reproduction, which changes her body temperature, which in turn makes her, in Aristotle's view, incapable of participating in political life.
On this ground, proponents of feminist metaphysics have accused Aristotle of misogyny  and sexism .
However, Aristotle gave equal weight to women's happiness as he did to men's, and commented in his Rhetoric that the things that lead to happiness need to be in women as well as men.
Economics  Main article: Politics (Aristotle)  Aristotle made substantial contributions to economic thought , especially to thought in the Middle Ages.
In Politics , Aristotle addresses the city, property , and trade .
His response to criticisms of private property , in Lionel Robbins 's view, anticipated later proponents of private property among philosophers and economists, as it related to the overall utility of social arrangements.
Aristotle believed that although communal arrangements may seem beneficial to society, and that although private property is often blamed for social strife, such evils in fact come from human nature .
In Politics , Aristotle offers one of the earliest accounts of the origin of money .
Money came into use because people became dependent on one another, importing what they needed and exporting the surplus.
For the sake of convenience, people then agreed to deal in something that is intrinsically useful and easily applicable, such as iron or silver .
Aristotle's discussions on retail and interest was a major influence on economic thought in the Middle Ages.
He had a low opinion of retail, believing that contrary to using money to procure things one needs in managing the household, retail trade seeks to make a profit .
It thus uses goods as a means to an end, rather than as an end unto itself.
He believed that retail trade was in this way unnatural.
Similarly, Aristotle considered making a profit through interest unnatural, as it makes a gain out of the money itself, and not from its use.
Aristotle gave a summary of the function of money that was perhaps remarkably precocious for his time.
He wrote that because it is impossible to determine the value of every good through a count of the number of other goods it is worth, the necessity arises of a single universal standard of measurement.
Money thus allows for the association of different goods and makes them "commensurable".
He goes on to state that money is also useful for future exchange, making it a sort of security.
That is, "if we do not want a thing now, we shall be able to get it when we do want it".
Rhetoric  Part of a series on Rhetoric  History  Ancient Greece  Asianism  Atticism  Attic orators  Calliope  Sophists  Ancient India  Ancient Rome  The age of Cicero  Second Sophistic  Middle Ages  Byzantine rhetoric  Trivium  Renaissance  Studia humanitatis  Modern period   Concepts  Captatio benevolentiae  Chironomia  Decorum  Delectare  Docere  Device  Eloquence  Eloquentia perfecta  Eunoia  Enthymeme  Facilitas  Fallacy  Informal  Figure of speech  Scheme  Trope  Five canons  Inventio  Dispositio  Elocutio  Memoria  Pronuntiatio  Hypsos  Imitatio  Kairos  Method of loci  Modes  Operations  Persuasion  Ethos  Pathos  Logos  Situation  Style  Grand  Sotto voce  Topos   Genres  Apologetics  Debate  Declamation  Controversia  Deliberative  Demagogy  Dialectic  Socratic method  Dissoi logoi  Elocution  Epideictic  Encomium  Panegyric  Eulogy  Farewell speech  Forensic  Funeral oration  Homiletics‎  Sermon  Invitational  Lecture  Public  Lightning talk  Maiden speech  Oratory  Polemic  Diatribe  Eristic  Philippic  Progymnasmata  Suasoria  Propaganda  Spin  Resignation speech  Stump speech  War-mongering   Criticism  Cluster  Dramatic  Pentadic  Frame  Genre  Ideological  Metaphoric  Mimesis  Narrative  Neo-Aristotelian   Rhetoricians  Aristotle  Aspasia  Augustine  Bakhtin  Booth  Brueggemann  Burke  Cicero  de Man  Demosthenes  Derrida  Erasmus  Gorgias  Hobbes  Isocrates  Lucian  Lysias  McLuhan  Ong  Perelman  Pizan  Plato  Protagoras  Quintilian  Ramus  Richards  Smith  Tacitus  Toulmin  Vico  Weaver   Works  Gorgias  (380 BC)  Phaedrus  (c.
370 BC)  Rhetoric  (c.
350 BC)  Rhetoric to Alexander  (c.
350 BC)  De Sophisticis Elenchis  (c.
350 BC)  Topics  (c.
350 BC)  De Inventione  (84 BC)  Rhetorica ad Herennium  (80 BC)  De Oratore  (55 BC)  A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions  (c.
50 BC)  De Optimo Genere Oratorum  (46 BC)  Orator  (46 BC)  On the Sublime  (c.
50)  Institutio Oratoria  (95)  Panegyrici Latini  (100–400)  Dialogus de oratoribus  (102)  De doctrina Christiana  (426)  De vulgari eloquentia  (1305)  Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style  (1521)  Language as Symbolic Action  (1966)  A General Rhetoric  (1970)   Subfields  Argumentation  Cognitive  Contrastive  Constitutive  Digital  Feminist  Native American  New  Health and medicine  Pedagogy  Procedural  Science  Technology  Therapy  Visual  Composition   Related  Ars dictaminis  Communication studies  Composition studies  Doxa  Glossary of rhetorical terms  Glossophobia  List of feminist rhetoricians  List of speeches  Oral skills  Orator  Pistis  Public rhetoric  Rhetoric of social intervention model  Rhetrickery  Rogerian argument  Seduction  Speechwriting  Talking point  TED  Terministic screen  Toulmin model  Wooden iron  v t e  Main article: Rhetoric (Aristotle)  Aristotle's Rhetoric proposes that a speaker can use three basic kinds of appeals to persuade his audience: ethos (an appeal to the speaker's character), pathos (an appeal to the audience's emotion), and logos (an appeal to logical reasoning).
He also categorizes rhetoric into three genres: epideictic (ceremonial speeches dealing with praise or blame), forensic (judicial speeches over guilt or innocence), and deliberative (speeches calling on an audience to make a decision on an issue).
Aristotle also outlines two kinds of rhetorical proofs : enthymeme (proof by syllogism ) and paradeigma (proof by example).
Poetics  Main article: Poetics (Aristotle)  Aristotle writes in his Poetics that epic poetry , tragedy, comedy, dithyrambic poetry , painting, sculpture, music, and dance are all fundamentally acts of mimesis ("imitation"), each varying in imitation by medium, object, and manner.
He applies the term mimesis both as a property of a work of art and also as the product of the artist's intention  and contends that the audience's realisation of the mimesis is vital to understanding the work itself.
Aristotle states that mimesis is a natural instinct of humanity that separates humans from animals   and that all human artistry "follows the pattern of nature".
Because of this, Aristotle believed that each of the mimetic arts possesses what Stephen Halliwell calls "highly structured procedures for the achievement of their purposes."
For example, music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony, whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone, and poetry with language.
The forms also differ in their object of imitation.
Comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average.
Lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation – through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama.
The Blind Oedipus Commending his Children to the Gods (1784) by Bénigne Gagneraux .
In his Poetics , Aristotle uses the tragedy Oedipus Tyrannus by Sophocles as an example of how the perfect tragedy should be structured, with a generally good protagonist who starts the play prosperous, but loses everything through some hamartia (fault).
While it is believed that Aristotle's Poetics originally comprised two books – one on comedy and one on tragedy – only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived.
Aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements: plot-structure, character, style, thought, spectacle, and lyric poetry.
The characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story; and the plot, not the characters, is the chief focus of tragedy.
Tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear, and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions.
Aristotle concludes Poetics with a discussion on which, if either, is superior: epic or tragic mimesis.
He suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic, possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music, is more unified, and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope, it can be considered superior to epic.
Aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles, folklore, and proverbs; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the Delphic Oracle and studied the fables of Aesop .
Transmission  Further information: List of writers influenced by Aristotle  More than 2300 years after his death, Aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived.
He contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence, and he was the founder of many new fields.
According to the philosopher Bryan Magee , "it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did".
Among countless other achievements, Aristotle was the founder of formal logic ,  pioneered the study of zoology , and left every future scientist and philosopher in his debt through his contributions to the scientific method.
Taneli Kukkonen, observes that his achievement in founding two sciences is unmatched, and his reach in influencing "every branch of intellectual enterprise" including Western ethical and political theory, theology, rhetoric, and literary analysis is equally long.
As a result, Kukkonen argues, any analysis of reality today "will almost certainly carry Aristotelian overtones ...
evidence of an exceptionally forceful mind."
Jonathan Barnes wrote that "an account of Aristotle's intellectual afterlife would be little less than a history of European thought".
Aristotle has been called the father of logic, biology, political science, zoology, embryology, natural law, scientific method, rhetoric, psychology, realism, criticism, individualism, teleology, and meteorology.
The scholar Taneli Kukkonen notes that "in the best 20th-century scholarship Aristotle comes alive as a thinker wrestling with the full weight of the Greek philosophical tradition."
What follows is an overview of the transmission and influence of his texts and ideas into the modern era.
His successor, Theophrastus  Main articles: Theophrastus and Historia Plantarum (Theophrastus)  Frontispiece to a 1644 version of Theophrastus 's Historia Plantarum , originally written around 300 BC.
Aristotle's pupil and successor, Theophrastus , wrote the History of Plants , a pioneering work in botany.
Some of his technical terms remain in use, such as carpel from carpos , fruit, and pericarp , from pericarpion , seed chamber.
Theophrastus was much less concerned with formal causes than Aristotle was, instead pragmatically describing how plants functioned.
Later Greek philosophy  Further information: Peripatetic school  The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school .
Aristotle's students included Aristoxenus , Dicaearchus , Demetrius of Phalerum , Eudemos of Rhodes , Harpalus , Hephaestion , Mnason of Phocis , Nicomachus , and Theophrastus.
Aristotle's influence over Alexander the Great is seen in the latter's bringing with him on his expedition a host of zoologists, botanists, and researchers.
He had also learned a great deal about Persian customs and traditions from his teacher.
Although his respect for Aristotle was diminished as his travels made it clear that much of Aristotle's geography was clearly wrong, when the old philosopher released his works to the public, Alexander complained "Thou hast not done well to publish thy acroamatic doctrines; for in what shall I surpass other men if those doctrines wherein I have been trained are to be all men's common property?"
Hellenistic science  Further information: Ancient Greek medicine  After Theophrastus, the Lyceum failed to produce any original work.
Though interest in Aristotle's ideas survived, they were generally taken unquestioningly.
It is not until the age of Alexandria under the Ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found.
The first medical teacher at Alexandria, Herophilus of Chalcedon , corrected Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation.
Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries , noting that the latter pulse while the former do not.
Though a few ancient atomists such as Lucretius challenged the teleological viewpoint of Aristotelian ideas about life, teleology (and after the rise of Christianity, natural theology ) would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 18th and 19th centuries.
Ernst Mayr states that there was "nothing of any real consequence in biology after Lucretius and Galen until the Renaissance."
Revival  In the slumbering centuries following the decline of the Roman Empire, Aristotle's vast philosophical and scientific corpus lay largely dormant in the West.
But in the burgeoning intellectual heartland of the Abbasid Caliphate, his works underwent a remarkable revival.
Translated into Arabic alongside other Greek classics, Aristotle's logic, ethics, and natural philosophy ignited the minds of early Islamic scholars.
Through meticulous commentaries and critical engagements, figures like Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina (Avicenna) breathed new life into Aristotle's ideas.
They harmonized his logic with Islamic theology, employed his scientific methodologies to explore the natural world, and even reinterpreted his ethics within the framework of Islamic morality.
This revival was not mere imitation.
Islamic thinkers embraced Aristotle's rigorous methods while simultaneously challenging his conclusions where they diverged from their own religious beliefs.
Byzantine scholars  See also: Commentaries on Aristotle and Byzantine Aristotelianism  Greek Christian scribes played a crucial role in the preservation of Aristotle by copying all the extant Greek language manuscripts of the corpus.
The first Greek Christians to comment extensively on Aristotle were Philoponus, Elias, and David in the sixth century, and Stephen of Alexandria in the early seventh century.
John Philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of Aristotle's views on the eternity of the world, movement, and other elements of Aristotelian thought.
Philoponus questioned Aristotle's teaching of physics, noting its flaws and introducing the theory of impetus to explain his observations.
After a hiatus of several centuries, formal commentary by Eustratius and Michael of Ephesus reappeared in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, apparently sponsored by Anna Comnena .
Medieval Islamic world  Further information: Logic in Islamic philosophy and Transmission of the Greek Classics  Islamic portrayal of Aristotle (right) in the Kitāb naʿt al-ḥayawān , c.
1220 .
Aristotle was one of the most revered Western thinkers in early Islamic theology .
Most of the still extant works of Aristotle,  as well as a number of the original Greek commentaries, were translated into Arabic and studied by Muslim philosophers, scientists and scholars.
Averroes , Avicenna and Alpharabius , who wrote on Aristotle in great depth, also influenced Thomas Aquinas and other Western Christian scholastic philosophers.
Alkindus greatly admired Aristotle's philosophy,  and Averroes spoke of Aristotle as the "exemplar" for all future philosophers.
Medieval Muslim scholars regularly described Aristotle as the "First Teacher".
The title was later used by Western philosophers (as in the famous poem of Dante ) who were influenced by the tradition of Islamic philosophy .
Medieval Europe  Further information: Aristotelianism and Syllogism § Medieval  With the loss of the study of ancient Greek in the early medieval Latin West, Aristotle was practically unknown there from c.
CE 600 to c.
1100 except through the Latin translation of the Organon made by Boethius .
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, interest in Aristotle revived and Latin Christians had translations made, both from Arabic translations, such as those by Gerard of Cremona ,  and from the original Greek, such as those by James of Venice and William of Moerbeke .
After the Scholastic Thomas Aquinas wrote his Summa Theologica , working from Moerbeke's translations and calling Aristotle "The Philosopher",  the demand for Aristotle's writings grew, and the Greek manuscripts returned to the West, stimulating a revival of Aristotelianism in Europe that continued into the Renaissance .
These thinkers blended Aristotelian philosophy with Christianity, bringing the thought of Ancient Greece into the Middle Ages.
Scholars such as Boethius, Peter Abelard , and John Buridan worked on Aristotelian logic.
According to scholar Roger Theodore Lafferty, Dante built up the philosophy of the Comedy with the works of Aristotle as a foundation, just as the scholastics used Aristotle as the basis for their thinking.
Dante knew Aristotle directly from Latin translations of his works and indirectly through quotations in the works of Albert Magnus .
Dante even acknowledges Aristotle's influence explicitly in the poem, specifically when Virgil justifies the Inferno's structure by citing the Nicomachean Ethics .
Dante famously refers to him as "he / Who is acknowledged Master of those who know".
Medieval Judaism  Moses Maimonides (considered to be the foremost intellectual figure of medieval Judaism)  adopted Aristotelianism from the Islamic scholars and based his Guide for the Perplexed on it and that became the basis of Jewish scholastic philosophy .
Maimonides also considered Aristotle to be the greatest philosopher that ever lived, and styled him as the "chief of the philosophers".
Also, in his letter to Samuel ibn Tibbon , Maimonides observes that there is no need for Samuel to study the writings of philosophers who preceded Aristotle because the works of the latter are "sufficient by themselves and  to all that were written before them.
His intellect, Aristotle's is the extreme limit of human intellect, apart from him upon whom the divine emanation has flowed forth to such an extent that they reach the level of prophecy, there being no level higher".
Early Modern science  William Harvey 's De Motu Cordis , 1628, showed that the blood circulated , contrary to classical era thinking.
In the Early Modern period, scientists such as William Harvey in England and Galileo Galilei in Italy reacted against the theories of Aristotle and other classical era thinkers like Galen , establishing new theories based to some degree on observation and experiment.
Harvey demonstrated the circulation of the blood , establishing that the heart functioned as a pump rather than being the seat of the soul and the controller of the body's heat, as Aristotle thought.
Galileo used more doubtful arguments to displace Aristotle's physics, proposing that bodies all fall at the same speed whatever their weight.
18th and 19th-century science  The English mathematician George Boole fully accepted Aristotle's logic, but decided "to go under, over, and beyond" it with his system of algebraic logic in his 1854 book The Laws of Thought .
This gives logic a mathematical foundation with equations, enables it to solve equations as well as check validity , and allows it to handle a wider class of problems by expanding propositions of any number of terms, not just two.
Charles Darwin regarded Aristotle as the most important contributor to the subject of biology.
In an 1882 letter he wrote that "Linnaeus and Cuvier have been my two gods, though in very different ways, but they were mere schoolboys to old Aristotle".
Also, in later editions of the book " On the Origin of Species ', Darwin traced evolutionary ideas as far back as Aristotle;  the text he cites is a summary by Aristotle of the ideas of the earlier Greek philosopher Empedocles .
Present science  The philosopher Bertrand Russell claims that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine".
Russell calls Aristotle's ethics "repulsive", and labelled his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy".
Russell states that these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembers what an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.
The Dutch historian of science Eduard Jan Dijksterhuis writes that Aristotle and his predecessors showed the difficulty of science by "proceed so readily to frame a theory of such a general character" on limited evidence from their senses.
In 1985, the biologist Peter Medawar could still state in "pure seventeenth century"  tones that Aristotle had assembled "a strange and generally speaking rather tiresome farrago of hearsay, imperfect observation, wishful thinking and credulity amounting to downright gullibility".
Zoologists have frequently mocked Aristotle for errors and unverified secondhand reports.
However, modern observation has confirmed several of his more surprising claims.
Aristotle's work remains largely unknown to modern scientists, though zoologists sometimes mention him as the father of biology  or in particular of marine biology .
Practising zoologists are unlikely to adhere to Aristotle's chain of being, but its influence is still perceptible in the use of the terms "lower" and "upper" to designate taxa such as groups of plants.
The evolutionary biologist Armand Marie Leroi has reconstructed Aristotle's biology,  while Niko Tinbergen's four questions , based on Aristotle's four causes, are used to analyse animal behaviour ; they examine function , phylogeny , mechanism , and ontogeny .
The concept of homology began with Aristotle;  the evolutionary developmental biologist  Lewis I.
Held commented that he would be interested in the concept of deep homology .
Surviving works  Corpus Aristotelicum  Main article: Works of Aristotle  First page of a 1566 edition of the Nicomachean Ethics in Greek and Latin.
The works of Aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are collected in the Corpus Aristotelicum.
These texts, as opposed to Aristotle's lost works, are technical philosophical treatises from within Aristotle's school.
Reference to them is made according to the organization of Immanuel Bekker 's Royal Prussian Academy edition ( Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica , Berlin, 1831–1870), which in turn is based on ancient classifications of these works.
Loss and preservation  Further information: Transmission of the Greek Classics  Aristotle wrote his works on papyrus scrolls, the common writing medium of that era.
His writings are divisible into two groups: the " exoteric ", intended for the public, and the " esoteric ", for use within the Lyceum school.
Aristotle's "lost" works stray considerably in characterization from the surviving Aristotelian corpus.
Whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with a view to subsequent publication, the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes not intended for publication.
Cicero 's description of Aristotle's literary style as "a river of gold" must have applied to the published works, not the surviving notes.
A major question in the history of Aristotle's works is how the exoteric writings were all lost, and how the ones now possessed came to be found.
The consensus is that Andronicus of Rhodes collected the esoteric works of Aristotle's school which existed in the form of smaller, separate works, distinguished them from those of Theophrastus and other Peripatetics, edited them, and finally compiled them into the more cohesive, larger works as they are known today.
According to Strabo and Plutarch , after Aristotle's death, his library and writings went to Theophrastus (Aristotle's successor as head of the Lycaeum and the Peripatetic school ).
After the death of Theophrastus, the peripatetic library went to Neleus of Scepsis .
: 5  Some time later, the Kingdom of Pergamon began conscripting books for a royal library, and the heirs of Neleus hid their collection in a cellar to prevent it from being seized for that purpose.
The library was stored there for about a century and a half, in conditions that were not ideal for document preservation.
On the death of Attalus III , which also ended the royal library ambitions, the existence of Aristotelian library was disclosed, and it was purchased by Apellicon and returned to Athens in about 100 BC.
: 5–6  Apellicon sought to recover the texts, many of which were seriously degraded at this point due to the conditions in which they were stored.
He had them copied out into new manuscripts, and used his best guesswork to fill in the gaps where the originals were unreadable.
: 5–6  When Sulla seized Athens in 86 BC, he seized the library and transferred it to Rome.
There, Andronicus of Rhodes organized the texts into the first complete edition of Aristotle's works (and works attributed to him).
The Aristotelian texts we have today are based on these.
: 6–8   Depictions in art  Paintings  Aristotle has been depicted by major artists including Lucas Cranach the Elder ,   Justus van Gent , Raphael , Paolo Veronese , Jusepe de Ribera ,   Rembrandt ,  and Francesco Hayez over the centuries.
Among the best-known depictions is Raphael's fresco  The School of Athens , in the Vatican's Apostolic Palace , where the figures of Plato and Aristotle are central to the image, at the architectural vanishing point , reflecting their importance.
Rembrandt's Aristotle with a Bust of Homer , too, is a celebrated work, showing the knowing philosopher and the blind Homer from an earlier age: as the art critic Jonathan Jones writes, "this painting will remain one of the greatest and most mysterious in the world, ensnaring us in its musty, glowing, pitch-black, terrible knowledge of time."
Nuremberg Chronicle  anachronistically shows Aristotle in a medieval scholar's clothing.
Ink and watercolour on paper, 1493     Aristotle by Justus van Gent .
Oil on panel, c.
1476     Phyllis and Aristotle by Lucas Cranach the Elder .
Oil on panel, 1530     Aristotle by Paolo Veronese , Biblioteka Marciana.
Oil on canvas, 1560s     Aristotle and Campaspe ,   Alessandro Turchi (attrib.)
Oil on canvas, 1713     Aristotle by Jusepe de Ribera .
Oil on canvas, 1637     Aristotle with a Bust of Homer by Rembrandt .
Oil on canvas, 1653     Aristotle by Johann Jakob Dorner the Elder .
Oil on canvas, 1813     Aristotle by Francesco Hayez .
Oil on canvas, 1811     By Charles Laplante  "That most enduring of romantic images, Aristotle tutoring the future conqueror Alexander".
1866    Sculptures     Roman copy of 1st or 2nd century from original bronze by Lysippos .
Louvre Museum     Roman copy of 117-138 AD of Greek original.
Palermo Regional Archeology Museum     Relief of Aristotle and Plato by Luca della Robbia , Florence Cathedral , 1437–1439     Stone statue in niche, Gladstone's Library , Hawarden , Wales, 1899     Bronze statue, University of Freiburg , Germany, 1915    Eponyms  The Aristotle Mountains in Antarctica are named after Aristotle.
He was the first person known to conjecture, in his book Meteorology , the existence of a landmass in the southern high-latitude region, which he called Antarctica .
Aristoteles is a crater on the Moon bearing the classical form of Aristotle's name.
This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .
Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.
( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Mathematical term; concerning axioms used to derive theorems  In mathematics and logic , an axiomatic system is any set of primitive notions and axioms to logically derive theorems .
A theory is a consistent, relatively-self-contained body of knowledge which usually contains an axiomatic system and all its derived theorems.
An axiomatic system that is completely described is a special kind of formal system .
A formal theory is an axiomatic system (usually formulated within model theory ) that describes a set of sentences that is closed under logical implication.
A formal proof is a complete rendition of a mathematical proof within a formal system.
Properties   An axiomatic system is said to be consistent if it lacks contradiction .
That is, it is impossible to derive both a statement and its negation from the system's axioms.
Consistency is a key requirement for most axiomatic systems, as the presence of contradiction would allow any statement to be proven ( principle of explosion ).
In an axiomatic system, an axiom is called independent if it cannot be proven or disproven from other axioms in the system.
A system is called independent if each of its underlying axioms is independent.
Unlike consistency, independence is not a necessary requirement for a functioning axiomatic system — though it is usually sought after to minimize the number of axioms in the system.
An axiomatic system is called complete if for every statement, either itself or its negation is derivable from the system's axioms (equivalently, every statement is capable of being proven true or false).
Relative consistency   Beyond consistency, relative consistency is also the mark of a worthwhile axiom system.
This describes the scenario where the undefined terms of a first axiom system are provided definitions from a second, such that the axioms of the first are theorems of the second.
A good example is the relative consistency of absolute geometry with respect to the theory of the real number system .
Lines and points are undefined terms (also called primitive notions ) in absolute geometry, but assigned meanings in the theory of real numbers in a way that is consistent with both axiom systems.
Models   A model for an axiomatic system is a well-defined set , which assigns meaning for the undefined terms presented in the system, in a manner that is correct with the relations defined in the system.
The existence of a concrete model proves the consistency of a system  .
A model is called concrete if the meanings assigned are objects and relations from the real world  , as opposed to an abstract model which is based on other axiomatic systems.
Models can also be used to show the independence of an axiom in the system.
By constructing a valid model for a subsystem without a specific axiom, we show that the omitted axiom is independent if its correctness does not necessarily follow from the subsystem.
Two models are said to be isomorphic if a one-to-one correspondence can be found between their elements, in a manner that preserves their relationship.
An axiomatic system for which every model is isomorphic to another is called categorial (sometimes categorical ).
The property of categoriality (categoricity) ensures the completeness of a system, however the converse is not true: Completeness does not ensure the categoriality (categoricity) of a system, since two models can differ in properties that cannot be expressed by the semantics of the system.
Example   As an example, observe the following axiomatic system, based on first-order logic with additional semantics of the following countably infinitely many axioms added (these can be easily formalized as an axiom schema ):      ∃   x   1    :  ∃   x   2    :  ¬  (   x   1    =   x   2    )    {\displaystyle \exists x_{1}:\exists x_{2}:\lnot (x_{1}=x_{2})}   (informally, there exist two different items).
∃   x   1    :  ∃   x   2    :  ∃   x   3    :  ¬  (   x   1    =   x   2    )  ∧  ¬  (   x   1    =   x   3    )  ∧  ¬  (   x   2    =   x   3    )    {\displaystyle \exists x_{1}:\exists x_{2}:\exists x_{3}:\lnot (x_{1}=x_{2})\land \lnot (x_{1}=x_{3})\land \lnot (x_{2}=x_{3})}   (informally, there exist three different items).
{\displaystyle ...}    Informally, this infinite set of axioms states that there are infinitely many different items.
However, the concept of an infinite set cannot be defined within the system — let alone the cardinality of such as set.
The system has at least two different models – one is the natural numbers (isomorphic to any other countably infinite set), and another is the real numbers (isomorphic to any other set with the cardinality of the continuum ).
In fact, it has an infinite number of models, one for each cardinality of an infinite set.
However, the property distinguishing these models is their cardinality — a property which cannot be defined within the system.
Thus the system is not categorial.
However it can be shown to be complete.
Axiomatic method   Stating definitions and propositions in a way such that each new term can be formally eliminated by the priorly introduced terms requires primitive notions (axioms) to avoid infinite regress .
This way of doing mathematics is called the axiomatic method .
A common attitude towards the axiomatic method is logicism .
In their book Principia Mathematica , Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell attempted to show that all mathematical theory could be reduced to some collection of axioms.
More generally, the reduction of a body of propositions to a particular collection of axioms underlies the mathematician's research program.
This was very prominent in the mathematics of the twentieth century, in particular in subjects based around homological algebra .
The explication of the particular axioms used in a theory can help to clarify a suitable level of abstraction that the mathematician would like to work with.
For example, mathematicians opted that rings need not be commutative , which differed from Emmy Noether 's original formulation.
Mathematicians decided to consider topological spaces more generally without the separation axiom which Felix Hausdorff originally formulated.
The Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory , a result of the axiomatic method applied to set theory, allowed the "proper" formulation of set-theory problems and helped avoid the paradoxes of naïve set theory .
One such problem was the continuum hypothesis .
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, with the historically controversial axiom of choice included, is commonly abbreviated ZFC , where "C" stands for "choice".
Many authors use ZF to refer to the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice excluded.
Today ZFC is the standard form of axiomatic set theory and as such is the most common foundation of mathematics .
History   Further information: History of Mathematics  Mathematical methods developed to some degree of sophistication in ancient Egypt, Babylon, India, and China, apparently without employing the axiomatic method.
Euclid of Alexandria authored the earliest extant axiomatic presentation of Euclidean geometry and number theory .
His idea begins with five undeniable geometric assumptions called axioms .
Then, using these axioms, he established the truth of other propositions by proofs , hence the axiomatic method.
Many axiomatic systems were developed in the nineteenth century, including non-Euclidean geometry , the foundations of real analysis , Cantor 's set theory , Frege 's work on foundations, and Hilbert 's 'new' use of axiomatic method as a research tool.
For example, group theory was first put on an axiomatic basis towards the end of that century.
Once the axioms were clarified (that inverse elements should be required, for example), the subject could proceed autonomously, without reference to the transformation group origins of those studies.
Issues   Not every consistent body of propositions can be captured by a describable collection of axioms.
In recursion theory, a collection of axioms is called recursive if a computer program can recognize whether a given proposition in the language is a theorem.
Gödel's first incompleteness theorem then tells us that there are certain consistent bodies of propositions with no recursive axiomatization.
Typically, the computer can recognize the axioms and logical rules for deriving theorems, and the computer can recognize whether a proof is valid, but to determine whether a proof exists for a statement is only soluble by "waiting" for the proof or disproof to be generated.
The result is that one will not know which propositions are theorems and the axiomatic method breaks down.
An example of such a body of propositions is the theory of the natural numbers , which is only partially axiomatized by the Peano axioms (described below).
In practice, not every proof is traced back to the axioms.
At times, it is not even clear which collection of axioms a proof appeals to.
For example, a number-theoretic statement might be expressible in the language of arithmetic (i.e.
the language of the Peano axioms) and a proof might be given that appeals to topology or complex analysis .
It might not be immediately clear whether another proof can be found that derives itself solely from the Peano axioms.
Any more-or-less arbitrarily chosen system of axioms is the basis of some mathematical theory, but such an arbitrary axiomatic system will not necessarily be free of contradictions, and even if it is, it is not likely to shed light on anything.
Philosophers of mathematics sometimes assert that mathematicians choose axioms "arbitrarily", but it is possible that although they may appear arbitrary when viewed only from the point of view of the canons of deductive logic, that appearance is due to a limitation on the purposes that deductive logic serves.
Example: The Peano axiomatization of natural numbers   Main article: Peano axioms  The mathematical system of natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ...
is based on an axiomatic system first devised by the mathematician Giuseppe Peano in 1889.
He chose the axioms, in the language of a single unary function symbol S (short for " successor "), for the set of natural numbers to be:  There is a natural number 0.
Every natural number a has a successor, denoted by Sa .
There is no natural number whose successor is 0.
Distinct natural numbers have distinct successors: if a ≠ b , then Sa ≠ Sb .
If a property is possessed by 0 and also by the successor of every natural number it is possessed by, then it is possessed by all natural numbers (" Induction axiom ").
Axiomatization   In mathematics , axiomatization is the process of taking a body of knowledge and working backwards towards its axioms.
It is the formulation of a system of statements (i.e.
axioms ) that relate a number of primitive terms — in order that a consistent body of propositions may be derived deductively from these statements.
Thereafter, the proof of any proposition should be, in principle, traceable back to these axioms.
Concept that is not defined in terms of previously defined concepts  In mathematics , logic , philosophy , and formal systems , a primitive notion is a concept that is not defined in terms of previously-defined concepts.
It is often motivated informally, usually by an appeal to intuition and everyday experience.
In an axiomatic theory , relations between primitive notions are restricted by axioms .
Some authors refer to the latter as "defining" primitive notions by one or more axioms, but this can be misleading.
Formal theories cannot dispense with primitive notions, under pain of infinite regress (per the regress problem ).
For example, in contemporary geometry, point , line , and contains are some primitive notions.
Instead of attempting to define them,  their interplay is ruled (in Hilbert's axiom system ) by axioms like "For every two points there exists a line that contains them both".
Details   Alfred Tarski explained the role of primitive notions as follows:    When we set out to construct a given discipline, we distinguish, first of all, a certain small group of expressions of this discipline that seem to us to be immediately understandable; the expressions in this group we call PRIMITIVE TERMS or UNDEFINED TERMS, and we employ them without explaining their meanings.
At the same time we adopt the principle: not to employ any of the other expressions of the discipline under consideration, unless its meaning has first been determined with the help of primitive terms and of such expressions of the discipline whose meanings have been explained previously.
The sentence which determines the meaning of a term in this way is called a DEFINITION,...
 An inevitable regress to primitive notions in the theory of knowledge was explained by Gilbert de B.
Robinson :  To a non-mathematician it often comes as a surprise that it is impossible to define explicitly all the terms which are used.
This is not a superficial problem but lies at the root of all knowledge; it is necessary to begin somewhere, and to make progress one must clearly state those elements and relations which are undefined and those properties which are taken for granted.
Examples   The necessity for primitive notions is illustrated in several axiomatic foundations in mathematics:  Set theory : The concept of the set is an example of a primitive notion.
As Mary Tiles writes:   'definition' of 'set' is less a definition than an attempt at explication of something which is being given the status of a primitive, undefined, term.
As evidence, she quotes Felix Hausdorff : "A set is formed by the grouping together of single objects into a whole.
A set is a plurality thought of as a unit."
Naive set theory : The empty set is a primitive notion.
To assert that it exists would be an implicit axiom .
Peano arithmetic : The successor function and the number zero are primitive notions.
Since Peano arithmetic is useful in regards to properties of the numbers, the objects that the primitive notions represent may not strictly matter.
Arithmetic of real numbers : Typically, primitive notions are: real number, two binary operations : addition and multiplication , numbers 0 and 1, ordering <.
Axiomatic systems : The primitive notions will depend upon the set of axioms chosen for the system.
Alessandro Padoa discussed this selection at the International Congress of Philosophy in Paris in 1900.
The notions themselves may not necessarily need to be stated; Susan Haack (1978) writes, "A set of axioms is sometimes said to give an implicit definition of its primitive terms."
Euclidean geometry : Under Hilbert's axiom system the primitive notions are point, line, plane, congruence, betweeness , and incidence .
Euclidean geometry : Under Peano's axiom system the primitive notions are point, segment , and motion .
Russell's primitives   In his book on philosophy of mathematics , The Principles of Mathematics  Bertrand Russell used the following notions: for class-calculus ( set theory ), he used relations , taking set membership as a primitive notion.
To establish sets, he also establishes propositional functions as primitive, as well as the phrase "such that" as used in set builder notation .
(pp 18,9) Regarding relations, Russell  takes as primitive notions the converse relation and complementary relation of a given xRy .
Furthermore, logical products of relations and relative products of relations are primitive.
(p 25) As for denotation of objects by  description, Russell acknowledges that a primitive notion is involved.
(p 27) The thesis of Russell’s book is "Pure mathematics uses only a few notions, and these are logical constants."
(p xxi) Form of reasoning  Deductive reasoning is the mental process of drawing valid inferences .
Relation between sides of a right triangle    Pythagorean theorem Type Theorem Field Euclidean geometry Statement The sum of the areas of the two squares on the legs ( a and b ) equals the area of the square on the hypotenuse ( c ).
Symbolic statement      a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2}}   Generalizations  Law of cosines  Solid geometry  Non-Euclidean geometry  Differential geometry  Consequences  Pythagorean triple  Reciprocal Pythagorean theorem  Complex number  Euclidean distance  Pythagorean trigonometric identity   Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane  Outline History ( Timeline )  Branches  Euclidean  Non-Euclidean  Elliptic  Spherical  Hyperbolic  Non-Archimedean geometry  Projective  Affine  Synthetic  Analytic  Algebraic  Arithmetic  Diophantine  Differential  Riemannian  Symplectic  Discrete differential  Complex  Finite  Discrete/Combinatorial  Digital  Convex  Computational  Fractal  Incidence  Noncommutative geometry  Noncommutative algebraic geometry   Concepts Features Dimension  Straightedge and compass constructions  Angle  Curve  Diagonal  Orthogonality ( Perpendicular )  Parallel  Vertex  Congruence  Similarity  Symmetry   Zero-dimensional  Point   One-dimensional  Line  segment  ray  Length   Two-dimensional  Plane  Area  Polygon   Triangle  Altitude  Hypotenuse  Pythagorean theorem   Parallelogram  Square  Rectangle  Rhombus  Rhomboid   Quadrilateral  Trapezoid  Kite   Circle  Diameter  Circumference  Area    Three-dimensional  Volume  Cube  cuboid  Cylinder  Dodecahedron  Icosahedron  Octahedron  Pyramid  Platonic Solid  Sphere  Tetrahedron   Four - / other-dimensional  Tesseract  Hypersphere   Geometers  by name  Aida  Aryabhata  Ahmes  Alhazen  Apollonius  Archimedes  Atiyah  Baudhayana  Bolyai  Brahmagupta  Cartan  Coxeter  Descartes  Euclid  Euler  Gauss  Gromov  Hilbert  Huygens  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Kātyāyana  Khayyám  Klein  Lobachevsky  Manava  Minkowski  Minggatu  Pascal  Pythagoras  Parameshvara  Poincaré  Riemann  Sakabe  Sijzi  al-Tusi  Veblen  Virasena  Yang Hui  al-Yasamin  Zhang  List of geometers   by period  BCE  Ahmes  Baudhayana  Manava  Pythagoras  Euclid  Archimedes  Apollonius  1–1400s  Zhang  Kātyāyana  Aryabhata  Brahmagupta  Virasena  Alhazen  Sijzi  Khayyám  al-Yasamin  al-Tusi  Yang Hui  Parameshvara  1400s–1700s  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Descartes  Pascal  Huygens  Minggatu  Euler  Sakabe  Aida  1700s–1900s  Gauss  Lobachevsky  Bolyai  Riemann  Klein  Poincaré  Hilbert  Minkowski  Cartan  Veblen  Coxeter  Present day  Atiyah  Gromov   v t e  In mathematics , the Pythagorean theorem or Pythagoras' theorem is a fundamental relation in Euclidean geometry between the three sides of a right triangle .
It states that the area of the square whose side is the hypotenuse (the side opposite the right angle ) is equal to the sum of the areas of the squares on the other two sides.
The theorem can be written as an equation relating the lengths of the sides a , b and the hypotenuse c , sometimes called the Pythagorean equation :         a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2    .
{\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2}.}
The theorem is named for the Greek philosopher Pythagoras , born around 570 BC.
The theorem has been proved numerous times by many different methods – possibly the most for any mathematical theorem.
The proofs are diverse, including both geometric proofs and algebraic proofs, with some dating back thousands of years.
When Euclidean space is represented by a Cartesian coordinate system in analytic geometry , Euclidean distance satisfies the Pythagorean relation: the squared distance between two points equals the sum of squares of the difference in each coordinate between the points.
The theorem can be generalized in various ways: to higher-dimensional spaces , to spaces that are not Euclidean , to objects that are not right triangles, and to objects that are not triangles at all but n -dimensional solids.
Proofs using constructed squares  Rearrangement proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
(The area of the white space remains constant throughout the translation rearrangement of the triangles.
At all moments in time, the area is always c² .
And likewise, at all moments in time, the area is always a²+b² .)
Rearrangement proofs  In one rearrangement proof, two squares are used whose sides have a measure of     a  +  b    {\displaystyle a+b}   and which contain four right triangles whose sides are a , b and c , with the hypotenuse being c .
In the square on the right side, the triangles are placed such that the corners of the square correspond to the corners of the right angle in the triangles, forming a square in the center whose sides are length c .
Each outer square has an area of     (  a  +  b   )   2      {\displaystyle (a+b)^{2}}   as well as     2  a  b  +   c   2      {\displaystyle 2ab+c^{2}}   , with     2  a  b    {\displaystyle 2ab}   representing the total area of the four triangles.
Within the big square on the left side, the four triangles are moved to form two similar rectangles with sides of length a and b .
These rectangles in their new position have now delineated two new squares, one having side length a is formed in the bottom-left corner, and another square of side length b formed in the top-right corner.
In this new position, this left side now has a square of area     (  a  +  b   )   2      {\displaystyle (a+b)^{2}}   as well as     2  a  b  +   a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle 2ab+a^{2}+b^{2}}   .
Since both squares have the area of     (  a  +  b   )   2      {\displaystyle (a+b)^{2}}   it follows that the other measure of the square area also equal each other such that     2  a  b  +   c   2      {\displaystyle 2ab+c^{2}}   =     2  a  b  +   a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle 2ab+a^{2}+b^{2}}   .
With the area of the four triangles removed from both side of the equation what remains is      a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2    .
In another proof rectangles in the second box can also be placed such that both have one corner that correspond to consecutive corners of the square.
In this way they also form two boxes, this time in consecutive corners, with areas      a   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}}   and      b   2      {\displaystyle b^{2}}   which will again lead to a second square of with the area     2  a  b  +   a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle 2ab+a^{2}+b^{2}}   .
English mathematician Sir Thomas Heath gives this proof in his commentary on Proposition I.47 in Euclid's  Elements , and mentions the proposals of German mathematicians Carl Anton Bretschneider and Hermann Hankel that Pythagoras may have known this proof.
Heath himself favors a different proposal for a Pythagorean proof, but acknowledges from the outset of his discussion "that the Greek literature which we possess belonging to the first five centuries after Pythagoras contains no statement specifying this or any other particular great geometric discovery to him."
Recent scholarship has cast increasing doubt on any sort of role for Pythagoras as a creator of mathematics, although debate about this continues.
Algebraic proofs  Diagram of the two algebraic proofs  The theorem can be proved algebraically using four copies of the same triangle arranged symmetrically around a square with side c , as shown in the lower part of the diagram.
This results in a larger square, with side a + b and area ( a + b ) 2 .
The four triangles and the square side c must have the same area as the larger square,      (  b  +  a   )   2    =   c   2    +  4     a  b   2    =   c   2    +  2  a  b  ,    {\displaystyle (b+a)^{2}=c^{2}+4{\frac {ab}{2}}=c^{2}+2ab,}    giving       c   2    =  (  b  +  a   )   2    −  2  a  b  =   b   2    +  2  a  b  +   a   2    −  2  a  b  =   a   2    +   b   2    .
{\displaystyle c^{2}=(b+a)^{2}-2ab=b^{2}+2ab+a^{2}-2ab=a^{2}+b^{2}.}
A similar proof uses four copies of a right triangle with sides a , b and c , arranged inside a square with side c as in the top half of the diagram.
The triangles are similar with area        1  2     a  b    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}ab}   , while the small square has side b − a and area ( b − a ) 2 .
The area of the large square is therefore      (  b  −  a   )   2    +  4     a  b   2    =  (  b  −  a   )   2    +  2  a  b  =   b   2    −  2  a  b  +   a   2    +  2  a  b  =   a   2    +   b   2    .
{\displaystyle (b-a)^{2}+4{\frac {ab}{2}}=(b-a)^{2}+2ab=b^{2}-2ab+a^{2}+2ab=a^{2}+b^{2}.}
But this is a square with side c and area c 2 , so       c   2    =   a   2    +   b   2    .
{\displaystyle c^{2}=a^{2}+b^{2}.}
Other proofs of the theorem  This theorem may have more known proofs than any other (the law of quadratic reciprocity being another contender for that distinction); the book The Pythagorean Proposition contains 370 proofs.
Proof using similar triangles  In this section, and as usual in geometry, a "word" of two capital letters, such as AB denotes the length of the line segment defined by the points labeled with the letters, and not a multiplication.
So, AB 2 denotes the square of the length AB and not the product     A  ×   B   2    .
{\displaystyle A\times B^{2}.}
Proof using similar triangles  This proof is based on the proportionality of the sides of three similar triangles, that is, upon the fact that the ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is the same regardless of the size of the triangles.
Let ABC represent a right triangle, with the right angle located at C , as shown on the figure.
Draw the altitude from point C , and call H its intersection with the side AB .
Point H divides the length of the hypotenuse c into parts d and e .
The new triangle, ACH, is similar to triangle ABC , because they both have a right angle (by definition of the altitude), and they share the angle at A , meaning that the third angle will be the same in both triangles as well, marked as θ in the figure.
By a similar reasoning, the triangle CBH is also similar to ABC .
The proof of similarity of the triangles requires the triangle postulate : The sum of the angles in a triangle is two right angles, and is equivalent to the parallel postulate .
Similarity of the triangles leads to the equality of ratios of corresponding sides:         B  C    A  B     =     B  H    B  C      and      A  C    A  B     =     A  H    A  C     .
{\displaystyle {\frac {BC}{AB}}={\frac {BH}{BC}}{\text{ and }}{\frac {AC}{AB}}={\frac {AH}{AC}}.}
The first result equates the cosines of the angles θ , whereas the second result equates their sines .
These ratios can be written as      B   C   2    =  A  B  ×  B  H   and   A   C   2    =  A  B  ×  A  H  .
{\displaystyle BC^{2}=AB\times BH{\text{ and }}AC^{2}=AB\times AH.}
Summing these two equalities results in      B   C   2    +  A   C   2    =  A  B  ×  B  H  +  A  B  ×  A  H  =  A  B  (  A  H  +  B  H  )  =  A   B   2    ,    {\displaystyle BC^{2}+AC^{2}=AB\times BH+AB\times AH=AB(AH+BH)=AB^{2},}    which, after simplification, demonstrates the Pythagorean theorem:      B   C   2    +  A   C   2    =  A   B   2    .
{\displaystyle BC^{2}+AC^{2}=AB^{2}.}
The role of this proof in history is the subject of much speculation.
The underlying question is why Euclid did not use this proof, but invented another.
One conjecture is that the proof by similar triangles involved a theory of proportions, a topic not discussed until later in the Elements , and that the theory of proportions needed further development at that time.
Einstein's proof by dissection without rearrangement  Right triangle on the hypotenuse dissected into two similar right triangles on the legs, according to Einstein's proof.
Albert Einstein gave a proof by dissection in which the pieces do not need to be moved.
Instead of using a square on the hypotenuse and two squares on the legs, one can use any other shape that includes the hypotenuse, and two similar shapes that each include one of two legs instead of the hypotenuse (see Similar figures on the three sides ).
In Einstein's proof, the shape that includes the hypotenuse is the right triangle itself.
The dissection consists of dropping a perpendicular from the vertex of the right angle of the triangle to the hypotenuse, thus splitting the whole triangle into two parts.
Those two parts have the same shape as the original right triangle, and have the legs of the original triangle as their hypotenuses, and the sum of their areas is that of the original triangle.
Because the ratio of the area of a right triangle to the square of its hypotenuse is the same for similar triangles, the relationship between the areas of the three triangles holds for the squares of the sides of the large triangle as well.
Euclid's proof  Proof in Euclid's Elements  In outline, here is how the proof in Euclid 's Elements proceeds.
The large square is divided into a left and right rectangle.
A triangle is constructed that has half the area of the left rectangle.
Then another triangle is constructed that has half the area of the square on the left-most side.
These two triangles are shown to be congruent , proving this square has the same area as the left rectangle.
This argument is followed by a similar version for the right rectangle and the remaining square.
Putting the two rectangles together to reform the square on the hypotenuse, its area is the same as the sum of the area of the other two squares.
The details follow.
Let A , B , C be the vertices of a right triangle, with a right angle at A .
Drop a perpendicular from A to the side opposite the hypotenuse in the square on the hypotenuse.
That line divides the square on the hypotenuse into two rectangles, each having the same area as one of the two squares on the legs.
For the formal proof, we require four elementary lemmata :  If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other, each to each, and the angles included by those sides equal, then the triangles are congruent ( side-angle-side ).
The area of a triangle is half the area of any parallelogram on the same base and having the same altitude.
The area of a rectangle is equal to the product of two adjacent sides.
The area of a square is equal to the product of two of its sides (follows from 3).
Next, each top square is related to a triangle congruent with another triangle related in turn to one of two rectangles making up the lower square.
Illustration including the new lines  Showing the two congruent triangles of half the area of rectangle BDLK and square BAGF  The proof is as follows:  Let ACB be a right-angled triangle with right angle CAB.
On each of the sides BC, AB, and CA, squares are drawn, CBDE, BAGF, and ACIH, in that order.
The construction of squares requires the immediately preceding theorems in Euclid, and depends upon the parallel postulate.
From A, draw a line parallel to BD and CE.
It will perpendicularly intersect BC and DE at K and L, respectively.
Join CF and AD, to form the triangles BCF and BDA.
Angles CAB and BAG are both right angles; therefore C, A, and G are collinear .
Angles CBD and FBA are both right angles; therefore angle ABD equals angle FBC, since both are the sum of a right angle and angle ABC.
Since AB is equal to FB, BD is equal to BC and angle ABD equals angle FBC, triangle ABD must be congruent to triangle FBC.
Since A-K-L is a straight line, parallel to BD, then rectangle BDLK has twice the area of triangle ABD because they share the base BD and have the same altitude BK, i.e., a line normal to their common base, connecting the parallel lines BD and AL.
(lemma 2)  Since C is collinear with A and G, and this line is parallel to FB, then square BAGF must be twice in area to triangle FBC.
Therefore, rectangle BDLK must have the same area as square BAGF = AB 2 .
By applying steps 3 to 10 to the other side of the figure, it can be similarly shown that rectangle CKLE must have the same area as square ACIH = AC 2 .
Adding these two results, AB 2 + AC 2 = BD × BK + KL × KC  Since BD = KL, BD × BK + KL × KC = BD(BK + KC) = BD × BC  Therefore, AB 2 + AC 2 = BC 2 , since CBDE is a square.
This proof, which appears in Euclid's Elements as that of Proposition 47 in Book 1, demonstrates that the area of the square on the hypotenuse is the sum of the areas of the other two squares.
This is quite distinct from the proof by similarity of triangles, which is conjectured to be the proof that Pythagoras used.
Proofs by dissection and rearrangement  Another by rearrangement is given by the middle animation.
A large square is formed with area c 2 , from four identical right triangles with sides a , b and c , fitted around a small central square.
Then two rectangles are formed with sides a and b by moving the triangles.
Combining the smaller square with these rectangles produces two squares of areas a 2 and b 2 , which must have the same area as the initial large square.
The third, rightmost image also gives a proof.
The upper two squares are divided as shown by the blue and green shading, into pieces that when rearranged can be made to fit in the lower square on the hypotenuse – or conversely the large square can be divided as shown into pieces that fill the other two.
This way of cutting one figure into pieces and rearranging them to get another figure is called dissection .
This shows the area of the large square equals that of the two smaller ones.
Animation showing proof by rearrangement of four identical right triangles   Animation showing another proof by rearrangement   Proof using an elaborate rearrangement   Proof by area-preserving shearing  Visual proof of the Pythagorean theorem by area-preserving shearing  As shown in the accompanying animation, area-preserving shear mappings and translations can transform the squares on the sides adjacent to the right-angle onto the square on the hypotenuse, together covering it exactly.
Each shear leaves the base and height unchanged, thus leaving the area unchanged too.
The translations also leave the area unchanged, as they do not alter the shapes at all.
Each square is first sheared into a parallelogram, and then into a rectangle which can be translated onto one section of the square on the hypotenuse.
Other algebraic proofs  A related proof was published by future U.S. President James A.
Garfield (then a U.S. Representative ) (see diagram).
Instead of a square it uses a trapezoid , which can be constructed from the square in the second of the above proofs by bisecting along a diagonal of the inner square, to give the trapezoid as shown in the diagram.
The area of the trapezoid can be calculated to be half the area of the square, that is        1  2    (  b  +  a   )   2    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{2}}(b+a)^{2}.}
The inner square is similarly halved, and there are only two triangles so the proof proceeds as above except for a factor of       1  2      {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{2}}}   , which is removed by multiplying by two to give the result.
Proof using differentials  One can arrive at the Pythagorean theorem by studying how changes in a side produce a change in the hypotenuse and employing calculus .
The triangle ABC is a right triangle, as shown in the upper part of the diagram, with BC the hypotenuse.
At the same time the triangle lengths are measured as shown, with the hypotenuse of length y , the side AC of length x and the side AB of length a , as seen in the lower diagram part.
Diagram for differential proof  If x is increased by a small amount dx by extending the side AC slightly to D , then y also increases by dy .
These form two sides of a triangle, CDE , which (with E chosen so CE is perpendicular to the hypotenuse) is a right triangle approximately similar to ABC .
Therefore, the ratios of their sides must be the same, that is:         d  y    d  x     =    x  y    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {dy}{dx}}={\frac {x}{y}}.}
This can be rewritten as     y   d  y  =  x   d  x    {\displaystyle y\,dy=x\,dx}   , which is a differential equation that can be solved by direct integration:      ∫  y   d  y  =  ∫  x   d  x   ,    {\displaystyle \int y\,dy=\int x\,dx\,,}    giving       y   2    =   x   2    +  C  .
{\displaystyle y^{2}=x^{2}+C.}
The constant can be deduced from x = 0, y = a to give the equation       y   2    =   x   2    +   a   2    .
{\displaystyle y^{2}=x^{2}+a^{2}.}
This is more of an intuitive proof than a formal one: it can be made more rigorous if proper limits are used in place of dx and dy .
Converse  The converse of the theorem is also true:    Given a triangle with sides of length a , b , and c , if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , then the angle between sides a and b is a right angle .
For any three positive real numbers  a , b , and c such that a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , there exists a triangle with sides a , b and c as a consequence of the converse of the triangle inequality .
This converse appears in Euclid's Elements (Book I, Proposition 48):  "If in a triangle the square on one of the sides equals the sum of the squares on the remaining two sides of the triangle, then the angle contained by the remaining two sides of the triangle is right."
It can be proved using the law of cosines or as follows: Let ABC be a triangle with side lengths a , b , and c , with a 2 + b 2 = c 2 .
Construct a second triangle with sides of length a and b containing a right angle.
By the Pythagorean theorem, it follows that the hypotenuse of this triangle has length c = √ a 2 + b 2 , the same as the hypotenuse of the first triangle.
Since both triangles' sides are the same lengths a , b and c , the triangles are congruent and must have the same angles.
Therefore, the angle between the side of lengths a and b in the original triangle is a right angle.
The above proof of the converse makes use of the Pythagorean theorem itself.
The converse can also be proved without assuming the Pythagorean theorem.
A corollary of the Pythagorean theorem's converse is a simple means of determining whether a triangle is right, obtuse, or acute, as follows.
Let c be chosen to be the longest of the three sides and a + b > c (otherwise there is no triangle according to the triangle inequality ).
The following statements apply:    If a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , then the triangle is right .
If a 2 + b 2 > c 2 , then the triangle is acute .
If a 2 + b 2 < c 2 , then the triangle is obtuse .
Edsger W.
Dijkstra has stated this proposition about acute, right, and obtuse triangles in this language:  sgn( α + β − γ ) = sgn( a 2 + b 2 − c 2 ),  where α is the angle opposite to side a , β is the angle opposite to side b , γ is the angle opposite to side c , and sgn is the sign function .
Consequences and uses of the theorem  Pythagorean triples  Main article: Pythagorean triple  A Pythagorean triple has three positive integers a , b , and c , such that a 2 + b 2 = c 2 .
In other words, a Pythagorean triple represents the lengths of the sides of a right triangle where all three sides have integer lengths.
Such a triple is commonly written ( a , b , c ).
Some well-known examples are (3, 4, 5) and (5, 12, 13).
A primitive Pythagorean triple is one in which a , b and c are coprime (the greatest common divisor of a , b and c is 1).
The following is a list of primitive Pythagorean triples with values less than 100:  (3, 4, 5), (5, 12, 13), (7, 24, 25), (8, 15, 17), (9, 40, 41), (11, 60, 61), (12, 35, 37), (13, 84, 85), (16, 63, 65), (20, 21, 29), (28, 45, 53), (33, 56, 65), (36, 77, 85), (39, 80, 89), (48, 55, 73), (65, 72, 97)  Inverse Pythagorean theorem  Given a right triangle with sides     a  ,  b  ,  c    {\displaystyle a,b,c}   and altitude      d    {\displaystyle d}   (a line from the right angle and perpendicular to the hypotenuse      c    {\displaystyle c}   ).
The Pythagorean theorem has,       a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2}}    while the inverse Pythagorean theorem relates the two legs      a  ,  b    {\displaystyle a,b}   to the altitude     d    {\displaystyle d}   ,          1   a   2      +    1   b   2      =    1   d   2        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{a^{2}}}+{\frac {1}{b^{2}}}={\frac {1}{d^{2}}}}    The equation can be transformed to,        1   (  x  z   )   2       +    1   (  y  z   )   2       =    1   (  x  y   )   2         {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{(xz)^{2}}}+{\frac {1}{(yz)^{2}}}={\frac {1}{(xy)^{2}}}}    where      x   2    +   y   2    =   z   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}+y^{2}=z^{2}}   for any non-zero real      x  ,  y  ,  z    {\displaystyle x,y,z}   .
If the     a  ,  b  ,  d    {\displaystyle a,b,d}   are to be integers , the smallest solution     a  >  b  >  d    {\displaystyle a>b>d}   is then        1   20   2      +    1   15   2      =    1   12   2        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{20^{2}}}+{\frac {1}{15^{2}}}={\frac {1}{12^{2}}}}    using the smallest Pythagorean triple     3  ,  4  ,  5    {\displaystyle 3,4,5}   .
The reciprocal Pythagorean theorem is a special case of the optic equation         1  p    +    1  q    =    1  r      {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{p}}+{\frac {1}{q}}={\frac {1}{r}}}    where the denominators are squares and also for a heptagonal triangle whose sides     p  ,  q  ,  r    {\displaystyle p,q,r}   are square numbers.
Incommensurable lengths  The spiral of Theodorus : A construction for line segments with lengths whose ratios are the square root of a positive integer  One of the consequences of the Pythagorean theorem is that line segments whose lengths are incommensurable (so the ratio of which is not a rational number ) can be constructed using a straightedge and compass .
Pythagoras' theorem enables construction of incommensurable lengths because the hypotenuse of a triangle is related to the sides by the square root operation.
The figure on the right shows how to construct line segments whose lengths are in the ratio of the square root of any positive integer.
Each triangle has a side (labeled "1") that is the chosen unit for measurement.
In each right triangle, Pythagoras' theorem establishes the length of the hypotenuse in terms of this unit.
If a hypotenuse is related to the unit by the square root of a positive integer that is not a perfect square, it is a realization of a length incommensurable with the unit, such as √ 2 , √ 3 , √ 5 .
For more detail, see Quadratic irrational .
Incommensurable lengths conflicted with the Pythagorean school's concept of numbers as only whole numbers.
The Pythagorean school dealt with proportions by comparison of integer multiples of a common subunit.
According to one legend, Hippasus of Metapontum ( ca.
470 B.C.)
was drowned at sea for making known the existence of the irrational or incommensurable.
A careful discussion of Hippasus's contributions is found in Fritz .
Complex numbers  The absolute value of a complex number z is the distance r from z to the origin.
For any complex number       z  =  x  +  i  y  ,    {\displaystyle z=x+iy,}    the absolute value or modulus is given by      r  =   |   z   |   =     x   2    +   y   2      .
{\displaystyle r=|z|={\sqrt {x^{2}+y^{2}}}.}
So the three quantities, r , x and y are related by the Pythagorean equation,       r   2    =   x   2    +   y   2    .
{\displaystyle r^{2}=x^{2}+y^{2}.}
Note that r is defined to be a positive number or zero but x and y can be negative as well as positive.
Geometrically r is the distance of the z from zero or the origin O in the complex plane .
This can be generalised to find the distance between two points, z 1 and z 2 say.
The required distance is given by       |    z   1    −   z   2     |   =    (   x   1    −   x   2     )   2    +  (   y   1    −   y   2     )   2      ,    {\displaystyle |z_{1}-z_{2}|={\sqrt {(x_{1}-x_{2})^{2}+(y_{1}-y_{2})^{2}}},}    so again they are related by a version of the Pythagorean equation,       |    z   1    −   z   2      |    2    =  (   x   1    −   x   2     )   2    +  (   y   1    −   y   2     )   2    .
{\displaystyle |z_{1}-z_{2}|^{2}=(x_{1}-x_{2})^{2}+(y_{1}-y_{2})^{2}.}
Euclidean distance  Main article: Euclidean distance  The distance formula in Cartesian coordinates is derived from the Pythagorean theorem.
If ( x 1 , y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ) are points in the plane, then the distance between them, also called the Euclidean distance , is given by        (   x   1    −   x   2     )   2    +  (   y   1    −   y   2     )   2      .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {(x_{1}-x_{2})^{2}+(y_{1}-y_{2})^{2}}}.}
More generally, in Euclidean n -space , the Euclidean distance between two points,     A   =   (   a   1    ,   a   2    ,  …  ,   a   n    )    {\displaystyle A\,=\,(a_{1},a_{2},\dots ,a_{n})}   and     B   =   (   b   1    ,   b   2    ,  …  ,   b   n    )    {\displaystyle B\,=\,(b_{1},b_{2},\dots ,b_{n})}   , is defined, by generalization of the Pythagorean theorem, as:        (   a   1    −   b   1     )   2    +  (   a   2    −   b   2     )   2    +  ⋯  +  (   a   n    −   b   n     )   2      =     ∑   i  =  1    n    (   a   i    −   b   i     )   2      .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {(a_{1}-b_{1})^{2}+(a_{2}-b_{2})^{2}+\cdots +(a_{n}-b_{n})^{2}}}={\sqrt {\sum _{i=1}^{n}(a_{i}-b_{i})^{2}}}.}
If instead of Euclidean distance, the square of this value (the squared Euclidean distance , or SED) is used, the resulting equation avoids square roots and is simply a sum of the SED of the coordinates:      (   a   1    −   b   1     )   2    +  (   a   2    −   b   2     )   2    +  ⋯  +  (   a   n    −   b   n     )   2    =   ∑   i  =  1    n    (   a   i    −   b   i     )   2    .
{\displaystyle (a_{1}-b_{1})^{2}+(a_{2}-b_{2})^{2}+\cdots +(a_{n}-b_{n})^{2}=\sum _{i=1}^{n}(a_{i}-b_{i})^{2}.}
The squared form is a smooth, convex function of both points, and is widely used in optimization theory and statistics , forming the basis of least squares .
Euclidean distance in other coordinate systems  If Cartesian coordinates are not used, for example, if polar coordinates are used in two dimensions or, in more general terms, if curvilinear coordinates are used, the formulas expressing the Euclidean distance are more complicated than the Pythagorean theorem, but can be derived from it.
A typical example where the straight-line distance between two points is converted to curvilinear coordinates can be found in the applications of Legendre polynomials in physics .
The formulas can be discovered by using Pythagoras' theorem with the equations relating the curvilinear coordinates to Cartesian coordinates.
For example, the polar coordinates ( r , θ ) can be introduced as:      x  =  r  cos  ⁡  θ  ,    y  =  r  sin  ⁡  θ  .
{\displaystyle x=r\cos \theta ,\ y=r\sin \theta .}
Then two points with locations ( r 1 , θ 1 ) and ( r 2 , θ 2 ) are separated by a distance s :       s   2    =  (   x   1    −   x   2     )   2    +  (   y   1    −   y   2     )   2    =  (   r   1    cos  ⁡   θ   1    −   r   2    cos  ⁡   θ   2     )   2    +  (   r   1    sin  ⁡   θ   1    −   r   2    sin  ⁡   θ   2     )   2    .
{\displaystyle s^{2}=(x_{1}-x_{2})^{2}+(y_{1}-y_{2})^{2}=(r_{1}\cos \theta _{1}-r_{2}\cos \theta _{2})^{2}+(r_{1}\sin \theta _{1}-r_{2}\sin \theta _{2})^{2}.}
Performing the squares and combining terms, the Pythagorean formula for distance in Cartesian coordinates produces the separation in polar coordinates as:           s   2       =   r   1    2    +   r   2    2    −  2   r   1     r   2     (   cos  ⁡   θ   1    cos  ⁡   θ   2    +  sin  ⁡   θ   1    sin  ⁡   θ   2     )         =   r   1    2    +   r   2    2    −  2   r   1     r   2    cos  ⁡   (    θ   1    −   θ   2     )         =   r   1    2    +   r   2    2    −  2   r   1     r   2    cos  ⁡  Δ  θ  ,        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}s^{2}&=r_{1}^{2}+r_{2}^{2}-2r_{1}r_{2}\left(\cos \theta _{1}\cos \theta _{2}+\sin \theta _{1}\sin \theta _{2}\right)\\&=r_{1}^{2}+r_{2}^{2}-2r_{1}r_{2}\cos \left(\theta _{1}-\theta _{2}\right)\\&=r_{1}^{2}+r_{2}^{2}-2r_{1}r_{2}\cos \Delta \theta ,\end{aligned}}}    using the trigonometric product-to-sum formulas .
This formula is the law of cosines , sometimes called the generalized Pythagorean theorem.
From this result, for the case where the radii to the two locations are at right angles, the enclosed angle Δ θ = π /2, and the form corresponding to Pythagoras' theorem is regained:      s   2    =   r   1    2    +   r   2    2    .
{\displaystyle s^{2}=r_{1}^{2}+r_{2}^{2}.}
The Pythagorean theorem, valid for right triangles, therefore is a special case of the more general law of cosines, valid for arbitrary triangles.
Pythagorean trigonometric identity  Main article: Pythagorean trigonometric identity  Similar right triangles showing sine and cosine of angle θ  In a right triangle with sides a , b and hypotenuse c , trigonometry determines the sine and cosine of the angle θ between side a and the hypotenuse as:      sin  ⁡  θ  =    b  c    ,   cos  ⁡  θ  =    a  c    .
{\displaystyle \sin \theta ={\frac {b}{c}},\quad \cos \theta ={\frac {a}{c}}.}
From that it follows:        cos    2    θ  +    sin    2    θ  =      a   2    +   b   2      c   2      =  1  ,    {\displaystyle {\cos }^{2}\theta +{\sin }^{2}\theta ={\frac {a^{2}+b^{2}}{c^{2}}}=1,}    where the last step applies Pythagoras' theorem.
This relation between sine and cosine is sometimes called the fundamental Pythagorean trigonometric identity.
In similar triangles, the ratios of the sides are the same regardless of the size of the triangles, and depend upon the angles.
Consequently, in the figure, the triangle with hypotenuse of unit size has opposite side of size sin θ and adjacent side of size cos θ in units of the hypotenuse.
Relation to the cross product  The area of a parallelogram as a cross product; vectors a and b identify a plane and a × b is normal to this plane.
The Pythagorean theorem relates the cross product and dot product in a similar way:        ‖   a   ×   b    ‖   2    +  (   a   ⋅   b    )   2    =  ‖   a    ‖   2    ‖   b    ‖   2    .
{\displaystyle \|\mathbf {a} \times \mathbf {b} \|^{2}+(\mathbf {a} \cdot \mathbf {b} )^{2}=\|\mathbf {a} \|^{2}\|\mathbf {b} \|^{2}.}
This can be seen from the definitions of the cross product and dot product, as           a   ×   b      =  a  b   n   sin  ⁡   θ        a   ⋅   b      =  a  b  cos  ⁡   θ   ,        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mathbf {a} \times \mathbf {b} &=ab\mathbf {n} \sin {\theta }\\\mathbf {a} \cdot \mathbf {b} &=ab\cos {\theta },\end{aligned}}}    with n a unit vector normal to both a and b .
The relationship follows from these definitions and the Pythagorean trigonometric identity.
This can also be used to define the cross product.
By rearranging the following equation is obtained      ‖   a   ×   b    ‖   2    =  ‖   a    ‖   2    ‖   b    ‖   2    −  (   a   ⋅   b    )   2    .
{\displaystyle \|\mathbf {a} \times \mathbf {b} \|^{2}=\|\mathbf {a} \|^{2}\|\mathbf {b} \|^{2}-(\mathbf {a} \cdot \mathbf {b} )^{2}.}
This can be considered as a condition on the cross product and so part of its definition, for example in seven dimensions .
As an axiom  Main article: Parallel postulate  If the first four of the Euclidean geometry axioms are assumed to be true then the Pythagorean theorem is equivalent to the fifth.
That is, Euclid's fifth postulate implies the Pythagorean theorem and vice-versa.
Generalizations  Similar figures on the three sides  The Pythagorean theorem generalizes beyond the areas of squares on the three sides to  any similar figures .
This was known by Hippocrates of Chios in the 5th century BC,  and was included by Euclid in his Elements :    If one erects similar figures (see Euclidean geometry ) with corresponding sides on the sides of a right triangle, then the sum of the areas of the ones on the two smaller sides equals the area of the one on the larger side.
This extension assumes that the sides of the original triangle are the corresponding sides of the three congruent figures (so the common ratios of sides between the similar figures are a:b:c ).
While Euclid's proof only applied to convex polygons, the theorem also applies to concave polygons and even to similar figures that have curved boundaries (but still with part of a figure's boundary being the side of the original triangle).
The basic idea behind this generalization is that the area of a plane figure is proportional to the square of any linear dimension, and in particular is proportional to the square of the length of any side.
Thus, if similar figures with areas A , B and C are erected on sides with corresponding lengths a , b and c then:        A   a   2      =    B   b   2      =    C   c   2       ,    {\displaystyle {\frac {A}{a^{2}}}={\frac {B}{b^{2}}}={\frac {C}{c^{2}}}\,,}        ⇒  A  +  B  =     a   2     c   2      C  +     b   2     c   2      C   .
{\displaystyle \Rightarrow A+B={\frac {a^{2}}{c^{2}}}C+{\frac {b^{2}}{c^{2}}}C\,.}
But, by the Pythagorean theorem, a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , so A + B = C .
Conversely, if we can prove that A + B = C for three similar figures without using the Pythagorean theorem, then we can work backwards to construct a proof of the theorem.
For example, the starting center triangle can be replicated and used as a triangle C on its hypotenuse, and two similar right triangles ( A and B ) constructed on the other two sides, formed by dividing the central triangle by its altitude .
The sum of the areas of the two smaller triangles therefore is that of the third, thus A + B = C and reversing the above logic leads to the Pythagorean theorem a 2 + b 2 = c 2 .
( See also Einstein's proof by dissection without rearrangement )   Generalization for similar triangles, green area A + B = blue area C   Pythagoras' theorem using similar right triangles   Generalization for regular pentagons   Law of cosines  Main article: Law of cosines  The separation s of two points (r 1 , θ 1 ) and (r 2 , θ 2 ) in polar coordinates is given by the law of cosines .
Interior angle Δθ = θ 1 −θ 2 .
The Pythagorean theorem is a special case of the more general theorem relating the lengths of sides in any triangle, the law of cosines, which states that      a   2    +   b   2    −  2  a  b  cos  ⁡   θ   =   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}-2ab\cos {\theta }=c^{2}}   where     θ    {\displaystyle \theta }   is the angle between sides     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   .
When     θ    {\displaystyle \theta }   is       π  2      {\displaystyle {\frac {\pi }{2}}}   radians or 90°, then     cos  ⁡   θ   =  0    {\displaystyle \cos {\theta }=0}   , and the formula reduces to the usual Pythagorean theorem.
Arbitrary triangle  Generalization of Pythagoras' theorem by Tâbit ibn Qorra .
Lower panel: reflection of triangle CAD (top) to form triangle DAC, similar to triangle ABC (top).
At any selected angle of a general triangle of sides a, b, c , inscribe an isosceles triangle such that the equal angles at its base θ are the same as the selected angle.
Suppose the selected angle θ is opposite the side labeled c .
Inscribing the isosceles triangle forms triangle CAD with angle θ opposite side b and with side r along c .
A second triangle is formed with angle θ opposite side a and a side with length s along c , as shown in the figure.
Thābit ibn Qurra stated that the sides of the three triangles were related as:          a   2    +   b   2    =  c  (  r  +  s  )    .
{\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c(r+s)\ .}
As the angle θ approaches π /2, the base of the isosceles triangle narrows, and lengths r and s overlap less and less.
When θ = π /2, ADB becomes a right triangle, r + s = c , and the original Pythagorean theorem is regained.
One proof observes that triangle ABC has the same angles as triangle CAD , but in opposite order.
(The two triangles share the angle at vertex A, both contain the angle θ, and so also have the same third angle by the triangle postulate .)
Consequently, ABC is similar to the reflection of CAD , the triangle DAC in the lower panel.
Taking the ratio of sides opposite and adjacent to θ,        c  b    =    b  r      .
{\displaystyle {\frac {c}{b}}={\frac {b}{r}}\ .}
Likewise, for the reflection of the other triangle,        c  a    =    a  s      .
{\displaystyle {\frac {c}{a}}={\frac {a}{s}}\ .}
Clearing fractions and adding these two relations:      c  s  +  c  r  =   a   2    +   b   2      ,    {\displaystyle cs+cr=a^{2}+b^{2}\ ,}    the required result.
The theorem remains valid if the angle     θ    {\displaystyle \theta }   is obtuse so the lengths r and s are non-overlapping.
General triangles using parallelograms  Generalization for arbitrary triangles, green area = blue area  Construction for proof of parallelogram generalization  Pappus's area theorem is a further generalization, that applies to triangles that are not right triangles, using parallelograms on the three sides in place of squares (squares are a special case, of course).
The upper figure shows that for a scalene triangle, the area of the parallelogram on the longest side is the sum of the areas of the parallelograms on the other two sides, provided the parallelogram on the long side is constructed as indicated (the dimensions labeled with arrows are the same, and determine the sides of the bottom parallelogram).
This replacement of squares with parallelograms bears a clear resemblance to the original Pythagoras' theorem, and was considered a generalization by Pappus of Alexandria in 4 AD    The lower figure shows the elements of the proof.
Focus on the left side of the figure.
The left green parallelogram has the same area as the left, blue portion of the bottom parallelogram because both have the same base b and height h .
However, the left green parallelogram also has the same area as the left green parallelogram of the upper figure, because they have the same base (the upper left side of the triangle) and the same height normal to that side of the triangle.
Repeating the argument for the right side of the figure, the bottom parallelogram has the same area as the sum of the two green parallelograms.
Solid geometry  Pythagoras' theorem in three dimensions relates the diagonal AD to the three sides.
A tetrahedron with outward facing right-angle corner  In terms of solid geometry , Pythagoras' theorem can be applied to three dimensions as follows.
Consider the cuboid shown in the figure.
The length of face diagonal  AC is found from Pythagoras' theorem as:          A  C   ¯      2    =      A  B   ¯      2    +      B  C   ¯      2     ,    {\displaystyle {\overline {AC}}^{\,2}={\overline {AB}}^{\,2}+{\overline {BC}}^{\,2}\,,}    where these three sides form a right triangle.
Using diagonal AC and the horizontal edge CD , the length of body diagonal  AD then is found by a second application of Pythagoras' theorem as:          A  D   ¯      2    =      A  C   ¯      2    +      C  D   ¯      2     ,    {\displaystyle {\overline {AD}}^{\,2}={\overline {AC}}^{\,2}+{\overline {CD}}^{\,2}\,,}    or, doing it all in one step:          A  D   ¯      2    =      A  B   ¯      2    +      B  C   ¯      2    +      C  D   ¯      2     .
{\displaystyle {\overline {AD}}^{\,2}={\overline {AB}}^{\,2}+{\overline {BC}}^{\,2}+{\overline {CD}}^{\,2}\,.}
This result is the three-dimensional expression for the magnitude of a vector v (the diagonal AD) in terms of its orthogonal components { v k } (the three mutually perpendicular sides):      ‖   v    ‖   2    =   ∑   k  =  1    3    ‖    v    k     ‖   2    .
{\displaystyle \|\mathbf {v} \|^{2}=\sum _{k=1}^{3}\|\mathbf {v} _{k}\|^{2}.}
This one-step formulation may be viewed as a generalization of Pythagoras' theorem to higher dimensions.
However, this result is really just the repeated application of the original Pythagoras' theorem to a succession of right triangles in a sequence of orthogonal planes.
A substantial generalization of the Pythagorean theorem to three dimensions is de Gua's theorem , named for Jean Paul de Gua de Malves : If a tetrahedron has a right angle corner (like a corner of a cube ), then the square of the area of the face opposite the right angle corner is the sum of the squares of the areas of the other three faces.
This result can be generalized as in the " n -dimensional Pythagorean theorem":    Let      x   1    ,   x   2    ,  …  ,   x   n      {\displaystyle x_{1},x_{2},\ldots ,x_{n}}   be orthogonal vectors in R n .
Consider the n -dimensional simplex S with vertices     0  ,   x   1    ,  …  ,   x   n      {\displaystyle 0,x_{1},\ldots ,x_{n}}   .
(Think of the ( n − 1)-dimensional simplex with vertices      x   1    ,  …  ,   x   n      {\displaystyle x_{1},\ldots ,x_{n}}   not including the origin as the "hypotenuse" of S and the remaining ( n − 1)-dimensional faces of S as its "legs".)
Then the square of the volume of the hypotenuse of S is the sum of the squares of the volumes of the n legs.
This statement is illustrated in three dimensions by the tetrahedron in the figure.
The "hypotenuse" is the base of the tetrahedron at the back of the figure, and the "legs" are the three sides emanating from the vertex in the foreground.
As the depth of the base from the vertex increases, the area of the "legs" increases, while that of the base is fixed.
The theorem suggests that when this depth is at the value creating a right vertex, the generalization of Pythagoras' theorem applies.
In a different wording:    Given an n -rectangular n -dimensional simplex, the square of the ( n − 1)-content of the facet opposing the right vertex will equal the sum of the squares of the ( n − 1)-contents of the remaining facets.
Inner product spaces  Vectors involved in the parallelogram law  The Pythagorean theorem can be generalized to inner product spaces ,  which are generalizations of the familiar 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional Euclidean spaces .
For example, a function may be considered as a vector with infinitely many components in an inner product space, as in functional analysis .
In an inner product space, the concept of perpendicularity is replaced by the concept of orthogonality : two vectors v and w are orthogonal if their inner product     ⟨   v   ,   w   ⟩    {\displaystyle \langle \mathbf {v} ,\mathbf {w} \rangle }   is zero.
The inner product is a generalization of the dot product of vectors.
The dot product is called the standard inner product or the Euclidean inner product.
However, other inner products are possible.
The concept of length is replaced by the concept of the norm ‖ v ‖ of a vector v , defined as:        ‖   v   ‖  ≡    ⟨   v   ,   v   ⟩     .
{\displaystyle \lVert \mathbf {v} \rVert \equiv {\sqrt {\langle \mathbf {v} ,\mathbf {v} \rangle }}\,.}
In an inner-product space, the Pythagorean theorem states that for any two orthogonal vectors v and w we have        ‖    v   +   w    ‖    2    =    ‖   v   ‖    2    +    ‖   w   ‖    2    .
{\displaystyle \left\|\mathbf {v} +\mathbf {w} \right\|^{2}=\left\|\mathbf {v} \right\|^{2}+\left\|\mathbf {w} \right\|^{2}.}
Here the vectors v and w are akin to the sides of a right triangle with hypotenuse given by the vector sum  v + w .
This form of the Pythagorean theorem is a consequence of the properties of the inner product :            ‖    v   +   w    ‖    2       =  ⟨   v  +  w   ,     v  +  w   ⟩        =  ⟨   v   ,     v   ⟩  +  ⟨   w   ,     w   ⟩  +  ⟨   v  ,    w   ⟩  +  ⟨   w  ,    v   ⟩        =    ‖   v   ‖    2    +    ‖   w   ‖    2    ,        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\left\|\mathbf {v} +\mathbf {w} \right\|^{2}&=\langle \mathbf {v+w} ,\ \mathbf {v+w} \rangle \\&=\langle \mathbf {v} ,\ \mathbf {v} \rangle +\langle \mathbf {w} ,\ \mathbf {w} \rangle +\langle \mathbf {v,\ w} \rangle +\langle \mathbf {w,\ v} \rangle \\&=\left\|\mathbf {v} \right\|^{2}+\left\|\mathbf {w} \right\|^{2},\end{aligned}}}    where     ⟨   v  ,    w   ⟩  =  ⟨   w  ,    v   ⟩  =  0    {\displaystyle \langle \mathbf {v,\ w} \rangle =\langle \mathbf {w,\ v} \rangle =0}   because of orthogonality.
A further generalization of the Pythagorean theorem in an inner product space to non-orthogonal vectors is the parallelogram law :        2  ‖   v    ‖   2    +  2  ‖   w    ‖   2    =  ‖   v  +  w    ‖   2    +  ‖   v  −  w    ‖   2      ,    {\displaystyle 2\|\mathbf {v} \|^{2}+2\|\mathbf {w} \|^{2}=\|\mathbf {v+w} \|^{2}+\|\mathbf {v-w} \|^{2}\ ,}    which says that twice the sum of the squares of the lengths of the sides of a parallelogram is the sum of the squares of the lengths of the diagonals.
Any norm that satisfies this equality is ipso facto a norm corresponding to an inner product.
The Pythagorean identity can be extended to sums of more than two orthogonal vectors.
If v 1 , v 2 , ..., v n are pairwise-orthogonal vectors in an inner-product space, then application of the Pythagorean theorem to successive pairs of these vectors (as described for 3-dimensions in the section on solid geometry ) results in the equation          ‖     ∑   k  =  1    n      v    k       ‖     2    =   ∑   k  =  1    n    ‖    v    k     ‖   2      {\displaystyle {\biggl \|}\sum _{k=1}^{n}\mathbf {v} _{k}{\biggr \|}^{2}=\sum _{k=1}^{n}\|\mathbf {v} _{k}\|^{2}}    Sets of m -dimensional objects in n -dimensional space  Another generalization of the Pythagorean theorem applies to Lebesgue-measurable sets of objects in any number of dimensions.
Specifically, the square of the measure of an m -dimensional set of objects in one or more parallel m -dimensional flats in n -dimensional Euclidean space is equal to the sum of the squares of the measures of the orthogonal projections of the object(s) onto all m -dimensional coordinate subspaces.
In mathematical terms:       μ   m  s    2    =   ∑   i  =  1    x       μ   2      m   p   i        {\displaystyle \mu _{ms}^{2}=\sum _{i=1}^{x}\mathbf {\mu ^{2}} _{mp_{i}}}    where:       μ   m      {\displaystyle \mu _{m}}   is a measure in m -dimensions (a length in one dimension, an area in two dimensions, a volume in three dimensions, etc.).
s    {\displaystyle s}   is a set of one or more non-overlapping m -dimensional objects in one or more parallel m -dimensional flats in n -dimensional Euclidean space.
μ   m  s      {\displaystyle \mu _{ms}}   is the total measure (sum) of the set of m -dimensional objects.
p    {\displaystyle p}   represents an m -dimensional projection of the original set onto an orthogonal coordinate subspace.
μ   m   p   i        {\displaystyle \mu _{mp_{i}}}   is the measure of the m -dimensional set projection onto m -dimensional coordinate subspace     i    {\displaystyle i}   .
Because object projections can overlap on a coordinate subspace, the measure of each object projection in the set must be calculated individually, then measures of all projections added together to provide the total measure for the set of projections on the given coordinate subspace.
x    {\displaystyle x}   is the number of orthogonal, m -dimensional coordinate subspaces in n -dimensional space ( R n ) onto which the m -dimensional objects are projected ( m ≤ n ):     x  =     (    n  m    )     =     n  !
m  !
(  n  −  m  )  !
{\displaystyle x={\binom {n}{m}}={\frac {n!}{m!(n-m)!}}}
Non-Euclidean geometry  The Pythagorean theorem is derived from the axioms of Euclidean geometry , and in fact, were the Pythagorean theorem to fail for some right triangle, then the plane in which this triangle is contained cannot be Euclidean.
More precisely, the Pythagorean theorem implies, and is implied by, Euclid's Parallel (Fifth) Postulate .
Thus, right triangles in a non-Euclidean geometry  do not satisfy the Pythagorean theorem.
For example, in spherical geometry , all three sides of the right triangle (say a , b , and c ) bounding an octant of the unit sphere have length equal to π /2, and all its angles are right angles, which violates the Pythagorean theorem because      a   2    +   b   2    =  2   c   2    >   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=2c^{2}>c^{2}}   .
Here two cases of non-Euclidean geometry are considered— spherical geometry and hyperbolic plane geometry ; in each case, as in the Euclidean case for non-right triangles, the result replacing the Pythagorean theorem follows from the appropriate law of cosines.
However, the Pythagorean theorem remains true in hyperbolic geometry and elliptic geometry if the condition that the triangle be right is replaced with the condition that two of the angles sum to the third, say A + B = C .
The sides are then related as follows: the sum of the areas of the circles with diameters a and b equals the area of the circle with diameter c .
Spherical geometry  Spherical triangle  For any right triangle on a sphere of radius R (for example, if γ in the figure is a right angle), with sides a , b , c , the relation between the sides takes the form:        cos  ⁡    c  R    =  cos  ⁡    a  R     cos  ⁡    b  R    .
{\displaystyle \cos {\frac {c}{R}}=\cos {\frac {a}{R}}\,\cos {\frac {b}{R}}.}
This equation can be derived as a special case of the spherical law of cosines that applies to all spherical triangles:      cos  ⁡    c  R    =  cos  ⁡    a  R     cos  ⁡    b  R    +  sin  ⁡    a  R     sin  ⁡    b  R     cos  ⁡   γ   .
{\displaystyle \cos {\frac {c}{R}}=\cos {\frac {a}{R}}\,\cos {\frac {b}{R}}+\sin {\frac {a}{R}}\,\sin {\frac {b}{R}}\,\cos {\gamma }.}
For infinitesimal triangles on the sphere (or equivalently, for finite spherical triangles on a sphere of infinite radius), the spherical relation between the sides of a right triangle reduces to the Euclidean form of the Pythagorean theorem.
To see how, assume we have a spherical triangle of fixed side lengths a , b , and c on a sphere with expanding radius R .
As R approaches infinity the quantities a/R , b/R , and c/R tend to zero and the spherical Pythagorean identity reduces to     1  =  1  ,    {\displaystyle 1=1,}   so we must look at its asymptotic expansion .
The Maclaurin series for the cosine function can be written as     cos  ⁡  x  =  1  −     1  2      x   2    +  O    (   x   4    )      {\textstyle \cos x=1-{\tfrac {1}{2}}x^{2}+O{\left(x^{4}\right)}}   with the remainder term in big O notation .
Letting     x  =  c   /   R    {\displaystyle x=c/R}   be a side of the triangle, and treating the expression as an asymptotic expansion in terms of R for a fixed c ,          cos  ⁡    c  R    =  1  −     c   2     2   R   2       +  O    (   R   −  4    )          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\cos {\frac {c}{R}}=1-{\frac {c^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+O{\left(R^{-4}\right)}\end{aligned}}}    and likewise for a and b .
Substituting the asymptotic expansion for each of the cosines into the spherical relation for a right triangle yields          1  −     c   2     2   R   2       +  O    (   R   −  4    )       =   (   1  −     a   2     2   R   2       +  O    (   R   −  4    )     )    (   1  −     b   2     2   R   2       +  O    (   R   −  4    )     )         =  1  −     a   2     2   R   2       −     b   2     2   R   2       +  O    (   R   −  4    )    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}1-{\frac {c^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+O{\left(R^{-4}\right)}&=\left(1-{\frac {a^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+O{\left(R^{-4}\right)}\right)\left(1-{\frac {b^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+O{\left(R^{-4}\right)}\right)\\&=1-{\frac {a^{2}}{2R^{2}}}-{\frac {b^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+O{\left(R^{-4}\right)}.\end{aligned}}}    Subtracting 1 and then negating each side,         c   2     2   R   2       =     a   2     2   R   2       +     b   2     2   R   2       +  O    (   R   −  4    )    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {c^{2}}{2R^{2}}}={\frac {a^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+{\frac {b^{2}}{2R^{2}}}+O{\left(R^{-4}\right)}.}
Multiplying through by 2 R 2 , the asymptotic expansion for c in terms of fixed a , b and variable R is       c   2    =   a   2    +   b   2    +  O    (   R   −  2    )    .
{\displaystyle c^{2}=a^{2}+b^{2}+O{\left(R^{-2}\right)}.}
The Euclidean Pythagorean relationship      c   2    =   a   2    +   b   2      {\textstyle c^{2}=a^{2}+b^{2}}   is recovered in the limit, as the remainder vanishes when the radius R approaches infinity.
For practical computation in spherical trigonometry with small right triangles, cosines can be replaced with sines using the double-angle identity     cos  ⁡   2  θ   =  1  −  2   sin   2    ⁡   θ     {\displaystyle \cos {2\theta }=1-2\sin ^{2}{\theta }}   to avoid loss of significance .
Then the spherical Pythagorean theorem can alternately be written as       sin   2    ⁡    c   2  R     =   sin   2    ⁡    a   2  R     +   sin   2    ⁡    b   2  R     −  2   sin   2    ⁡    a   2  R       sin   2    ⁡    b   2  R     .
{\displaystyle \sin ^{2}{\frac {c}{2R}}=\sin ^{2}{\frac {a}{2R}}+\sin ^{2}{\frac {b}{2R}}-2\sin ^{2}{\frac {a}{2R}}\,\sin ^{2}{\frac {b}{2R}}.}
Hyperbolic geometry  Hyperbolic triangle  In a hyperbolic space with uniform Gaussian curvature −1/ R 2 , for a right triangle with legs a , b , and hypotenuse c , the relation between the sides takes the form:        cosh  ⁡    c  R    =  cosh  ⁡    a  R     cosh  ⁡    b  R      {\displaystyle \cosh {\frac {c}{R}}=\cosh {\frac {a}{R}}\,\cosh {\frac {b}{R}}}    where cosh is the hyperbolic cosine .
This formula is a special form of the hyperbolic law of cosines that applies to all hyperbolic triangles:        cosh  ⁡    c  R    =  cosh  ⁡    a  R      cosh  ⁡    b  R    −  sinh  ⁡    a  R      sinh  ⁡    b  R      cos  ⁡  γ    ,    {\displaystyle \cosh {\frac {c}{R}}=\cosh {\frac {a}{R}}\ \cosh {\frac {b}{R}}-\sinh {\frac {a}{R}}\ \sinh {\frac {b}{R}}\ \cos \gamma \ ,}    with γ the angle at the vertex opposite the side c .
By using the Maclaurin series for the hyperbolic cosine, cosh x ≈ 1 + x 2 /2 , it can be shown that as a hyperbolic triangle becomes very small (that is, as a , b , and c all approach zero), the hyperbolic relation for a right triangle approaches the form of Pythagoras' theorem.
For small right triangles ( a , b << R ), the hyperbolic cosines can be eliminated to avoid loss of significance , giving       sinh   2    ⁡    c   2  R     =   sinh   2    ⁡    a   2  R     +   sinh   2    ⁡    b   2  R     +  2   sinh   2    ⁡    a   2  R      sinh   2    ⁡    b   2  R      .
{\displaystyle \sinh ^{2}{\frac {c}{2R}}=\sinh ^{2}{\frac {a}{2R}}+\sinh ^{2}{\frac {b}{2R}}+2\sinh ^{2}{\frac {a}{2R}}\sinh ^{2}{\frac {b}{2R}}\,.}
Very small triangles  For any uniform curvature K (positive, zero, or negative), in very small right triangles (| K | a 2 , | K | b 2 << 1) with hypotenuse c , it can be shown that       c   2    =   a   2    +   b   2    −    K  3     a   2     b   2    −     K   2    45     a   2     b   2    (   a   2    +   b   2    )  −     2   K   3     945     a   2     b   2    (   a   2    −   b   2     )   2    +  O  (   K   4     c   10    )   .
{\displaystyle c^{2}=a^{2}+b^{2}-{\frac {K}{3}}a^{2}b^{2}-{\frac {K^{2}}{45}}a^{2}b^{2}(a^{2}+b^{2})-{\frac {2K^{3}}{945}}a^{2}b^{2}(a^{2}-b^{2})^{2}+O(K^{4}c^{10})\,.}
Differential geometry  Distance between infinitesimally separated points in Cartesian coordinates (top) and polar coordinates (bottom), as given by Pythagoras' theorem  The Pythagorean theorem applies to infinitesimal triangles seen in differential geometry .
In three dimensional space, the distance between two infinitesimally separated points satisfies      d   s   2    =  d   x   2    +  d   y   2    +  d   z   2    ,    {\displaystyle ds^{2}=dx^{2}+dy^{2}+dz^{2},}    with ds the element of distance and ( dx , dy , dz ) the components of the vector separating the two points.
Such a space is called a Euclidean space .
However, in Riemannian geometry , a generalization of this expression useful for general coordinates (not just Cartesian) and general spaces (not just Euclidean) takes the form:        d   s   2    =   ∑   i  ,  j    n     g   i  j     d   x   i     d   x   j      {\displaystyle ds^{2}=\sum _{i,j}^{n}g_{ij}\,dx_{i}\,dx_{j}}    which is called the metric tensor .
(Sometimes, by abuse of language, the same term is applied to the set of coefficients g ij .)
It may be a function of position, and often describes curved space .
A simple example is Euclidean (flat) space expressed in curvilinear coordinates .
For example, in polar coordinates :      d   s   2    =  d   r   2    +   r   2    d   θ   2      .
{\displaystyle ds^{2}=dr^{2}+r^{2}d\theta ^{2}\ .}
History  The Plimpton 322 tablet records Pythagorean triples from Babylonian times.
There is debate whether the Pythagorean theorem was discovered once, or many times in many places, and the date of first discovery is uncertain, as is the date of the first proof.
Historians of Mesopotamian mathematics have concluded that the Pythagorean rule was in widespread use during the Old Babylonian period (20th to 16th centuries BC), over a thousand years before Pythagoras was born.
The history of the theorem can be divided into four parts: knowledge of Pythagorean triples , knowledge of the relationship among the sides of a right triangle, knowledge of the relationships among adjacent angles, and proofs of the theorem within some deductive system .
Written c.
1800  BC, the Egyptian  Middle Kingdom  Berlin Papyrus 6619 includes a problem whose solution is the Pythagorean triple 6:8:10, but the problem does not mention a triangle.
The Mesopotamian tablet Plimpton 322 , written near Larsa also c.
1800  BC, contains many entries closely related to Pythagorean triples.
In India , the Baudhayana  Shulba Sutra , the dates of which are given variously as between the 8th and 5th century BC,  contains a list of Pythagorean triples and a statement of the Pythagorean theorem, both in the special case of the isosceles  right triangle and in the general case, as does the Apastamba Shulba Sutra ( c.
600 BC ).
Byzantine  Neoplatonic philosopher and mathematician Proclus , writing in the fifth century AD, states two arithmetic rules, "one of them attributed to Plato , the other to Pythagoras",  for generating special Pythagorean triples.
The rule attributed to Pythagoras ( c.
570 – c.
495 BC ) starts from an odd number and produces a triple with leg and hypotenuse differing by one unit; the rule attributed to Plato (428/427 or 424/423 – 348/347 BC) starts from an even number and produces a triple with leg and hypotenuse differing by two units.
According to Thomas L.
Heath (1861–1940), no specific attribution of the theorem to Pythagoras exists in the surviving Greek literature from the five centuries after Pythagoras lived.
However, when authors such as Plutarch and Cicero attributed the theorem to Pythagoras, they did so in a way which suggests that the attribution was widely known and undoubted.
Classicist  Kurt von Fritz wrote, "Whether this formula is rightly attributed to Pythagoras personally ...
one can safely assume that it belongs to the very oldest period of Pythagorean mathematics ."
Around 300 BC, in Euclid's Elements , the oldest extant axiomatic proof of the theorem is presented.
Geometric proof of the Pythagorean theorem from the Zhoubi Suanjing  With contents known much earlier, but in surviving texts dating from roughly the 1st century BC, the Chinese text Zhoubi Suanjing (周髀算经), ( The Arithmetical Classic of the Gnomon and the Circular Paths of Heaven ) gives a reasoning for the Pythagorean theorem for the (3, 4, 5) triangle — in China it is called the " Gougu theorem " (勾股定理).
During the Han Dynasty (202 BC to 220 AD), Pythagorean triples appear in The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art ,  together with a mention of right triangles.
Some believe the theorem arose first in China in the 11th century BC,  where it is alternatively known as the " Shang Gao theorem " (商高定理),  named after the Duke of Zhou's astronomer and mathematician, whose reasoning composed most of what was in the Zhoubi Suanjing .
Mathematics of integer properties  For the book by André Weil, see Number Theory: An Approach Through History from Hammurapi to Legendre .
Not to be confused with Numerology .
The distribution of prime numbers is a central point of study in number theory.
This Ulam spiral serves to illustrate it, hinting, in particular, at the conditional independence between being prime and being a value of certain quadratic polynomials.
Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Number theory (or arithmetic or higher arithmetic in older usage) is a branch of pure mathematics devoted primarily to the study of the integers and arithmetic functions .
German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) said, "Mathematics is the queen of the sciences—and number theory is the queen of mathematics."
Number theorists study prime numbers as well as the properties of mathematical objects constructed from integers (for example, rational numbers ), or defined as generalizations of the integers (for example, algebraic integers ).
Integers can be considered either in themselves or as solutions to equations ( Diophantine geometry ).
Questions in number theory are often best understood through the study of analytical objects (for example, the Riemann zeta function ) that encode properties of the integers, primes or other number-theoretic objects in some fashion ( analytic number theory ).
One may also study real numbers in relation to rational numbers, for example, as approximated by the latter ( Diophantine approximation ).
The older term for number theory is arithmetic .
By the early twentieth century, it had been superseded by "number theory".
(The word " arithmetic " is used by the general public to mean " elementary calculations "; it has also acquired other meanings in mathematical logic , as in Peano arithmetic , and computer science , as in floating-point arithmetic .)
The use of the term arithmetic for number theory regained some ground in the second half of the 20th century, arguably in part due to French influence.
In particular, arithmetical is commonly preferred as an adjective to number-theoretic .
History   Origins   Dawn of arithmetic   The Plimpton 322 tablet  The earliest historical find of an arithmetical nature is a fragment of a table: the broken clay tablet Plimpton 322 ( Larsa, Mesopotamia , ca.
1800 BC) contains a list of " Pythagorean triples ", that is, integers     (  a  ,  b  ,  c  )    {\displaystyle (a,b,c)}   such that      a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2}}   .
The triples are too many and too large to have been obtained by brute force .
The heading over the first column reads: "The takiltum of the diagonal which has been subtracted such that the width..."   The table's layout suggests  that it was constructed by means of what amounts, in modern language, to the identity         (     1  2     (   x  −    1  x     )    )    2    +  1  =    (     1  2     (   x  +    1  x     )    )    2    ,    {\displaystyle \left({\frac {1}{2}}\left(x-{\frac {1}{x}}\right)\right)^{2}+1=\left({\frac {1}{2}}\left(x+{\frac {1}{x}}\right)\right)^{2},}    which is implicit in routine Old Babylonian exercises.
If some other method was used,  the triples were first constructed and then reordered by     c   /   a    {\displaystyle c/a}   , presumably for actual use as a "table", for example, with a view to applications.
It is not known what these applications may have been, or whether there could have been any; Babylonian astronomy , for example, truly came into its own only later.
It has been suggested instead that the table was a source of numerical examples for school problems.
While Babylonian number theory—or what survives of Babylonian mathematics that can be called thus—consists of this single, striking fragment, Babylonian algebra (in the secondary-school sense of " algebra ") was exceptionally well developed.
Late Neoplatonic sources  state that Pythagoras learned mathematics from the Babylonians.
Much earlier sources  state that Thales and Pythagoras traveled and studied in Egypt .
Euclid IX 21–34 is very probably Pythagorean;  it is very simple material ("odd times even is even", "if an odd number measures  an even number, then it also measures  half of it"), but it is all that is needed to prove that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational .
Pythagorean mystics gave great importance to the odd and the even.
The discovery that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational is credited to the early Pythagoreans (pre- Theodorus ).
By revealing (in modern terms) that numbers could be irrational, this discovery seems to have provoked the first foundational crisis in mathematical history; its proof or its divulgation are sometimes credited to Hippasus , who was expelled or split from the Pythagorean sect.
This forced a distinction between numbers (integers and the rationals—the subjects of arithmetic), on the one hand, and lengths and proportions (which we would identify with real numbers, whether rational or not), on the other hand.
The Pythagorean tradition spoke also of so-called polygonal or figurate numbers .
While square numbers , cubic numbers , etc., are seen now as more natural than triangular numbers , pentagonal numbers , etc., the study of the sums of triangular and pentagonal numbers would prove fruitful in the early modern period (17th to early 19th centuries).
We know of no clearly arithmetical material in ancient Egyptian or Vedic sources, though there is some algebra in each.
The Chinese remainder theorem appears as an exercise  in Sunzi Suanjing (3rd, 4th or 5th century CE).
(There is one important step glossed over in Sunzi's solution:  it is the problem that was later solved by Āryabhaṭa 's Kuṭṭaka – see below .)
There is also some numerical mysticism in Chinese mathematics,  but, unlike that of the Pythagoreans, it seems to have led nowhere.
Like the Pythagoreans' perfect numbers , magic squares have passed from superstition into recreation .
Classical Greece and the early Hellenistic period   Further information: Ancient Greek mathematics  Aside from a few fragments, the mathematics of Classical Greece is known to us either through the reports of contemporary non-mathematicians or through mathematical works from the early Hellenistic period .
In the case of number theory, this means, by and large, Plato and Euclid , respectively.
While Asian mathematics influenced Greek and Hellenistic learning, it seems to be the case that Greek mathematics is also an indigenous tradition.
Eusebius , PE X, chapter 4 mentions of Pythagoras :  "In fact the said Pythagoras, while busily studying the wisdom of each nation, visited Babylon, and Egypt, and all Persia, being instructed by the Magi and the priests: and in addition to these he is related to have studied under the Brahmans (these are Indian philosophers); and from some he gathered astrology, from others geometry, and arithmetic and music from others, and different things from different nations, and only from the wise men of Greece did he get nothing, wedded as they were to a poverty and dearth of wisdom: so on the contrary he himself became the author of instruction to the Greeks in the learning which he had procured from abroad."
Aristotle claimed that the philosophy of Plato closely followed the teachings of the Pythagoreans,  and Cicero repeats this claim: Platonem ferunt didicisse Pythagorea omnia ("They say Plato learned all things Pythagorean").
Plato had a keen interest in mathematics, and distinguished clearly between arithmetic and calculation.
(By arithmetic he meant, in part, theorising on number, rather than what arithmetic or number theory have come to mean.)
It is through one of Plato's dialogues—namely, Theaetetus —that we know that Theodorus had proven that       3    ,    5    ,  …  ,    17      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {3}},{\sqrt {5}},\dots ,{\sqrt {17}}}   are irrational.
Theaetetus was, like Plato, a disciple of Theodorus's; he worked on distinguishing different kinds of incommensurables , and was thus arguably a pioneer in the study of number systems .
(Book X of Euclid's Elements is described by Pappus as being largely based on Theaetetus's work.)
Euclid devoted part of his Elements to prime numbers and divisibility, topics that belong unambiguously to number theory and are basic to it (Books VII to IX of Euclid's Elements).
In particular, he gave an algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor of two numbers (the Euclidean algorithm ; Elements , Prop.
VII.2) and the first known proof of the infinitude of primes ( Elements , Prop.
IX.20).
In 1773, Lessing published an epigram he had found in a manuscript during his work as a librarian; it claimed to be a letter sent by Archimedes to Eratosthenes .
The epigram proposed what has become known as Archimedes's cattle problem ; its solution (absent from the manuscript) requires solving an indeterminate quadratic equation (which reduces to what would later be misnamed Pell's equation ).
As far as we know, such equations were first successfully treated by the Indian school .
It is not known whether Archimedes himself had a method of solution.
Diophantus   Title page of the 1621 edition of Diophantus of Alexandria 's Arithmetica , translated into Latin by Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac  Very little is known about Diophantus of Alexandria ; he probably lived in the third century AD, that is, about five hundred years after Euclid.
Six out of the thirteen books of Diophantus's Arithmetica survive in the original Greek and four more survive in an Arabic translation.
The Arithmetica is a collection of worked-out problems where the task is invariably to find rational solutions to a system of polynomial equations, usually of the form     f  (  x  ,  y  )  =   z   2      {\displaystyle f(x,y)=z^{2}}   or     f  (  x  ,  y  ,  z  )  =   w   2      {\displaystyle f(x,y,z)=w^{2}}   .
Thus, nowadays, we speak of Diophantine equations when we speak of polynomial equations to which rational or integer solutions must be found.
One may say that Diophantus was studying rational points , that is, points whose coordinates are rational—on curves and algebraic varieties ; however, unlike the Greeks of the Classical period, who did what we would now call basic algebra in geometrical terms, Diophantus did what we would now call basic algebraic geometry in purely algebraic terms.
In modern language, what Diophantus did was to find rational parametrizations of varieties; that is, given an equation of the form (say)     f  (   x   1    ,   x   2    ,   x   3    )  =  0    {\displaystyle f(x_{1},x_{2},x_{3})=0}   , his aim was to find (in essence) three rational functions       g   1    ,   g   2    ,   g   3      {\displaystyle g_{1},g_{2},g_{3}}   such that, for all values of     r    {\displaystyle r}   and     s    {\displaystyle s}   , setting      x   i    =   g   i    (  r  ,  s  )    {\displaystyle x_{i}=g_{i}(r,s)}   for     i  =  1  ,  2  ,  3    {\displaystyle i=1,2,3}   gives a solution to     f  (   x   1    ,   x   2    ,   x   3    )  =  0.
{\displaystyle f(x_{1},x_{2},x_{3})=0.}
Diophantus also studied the equations of some non-rational curves, for which no rational parametrisation is possible.
He managed to find some rational points on these curves ( elliptic curves , as it happens, in what seems to be their first known occurrence) by means of what amounts to a tangent construction: translated into coordinate geometry
(which did not exist in Diophantus's time), his method would be visualised as drawing a tangent to a curve at a known rational point, and then finding the other point of intersection of the tangent with the curve; that other point is a new rational point.
(Diophantus also resorted to what could be called a special case of a secant construction.)
While Diophantus was concerned largely with rational solutions, he assumed some results on integer numbers, in particular that every integer is the sum of four squares (though he never stated as much explicitly).
Āryabhaṭa, Brahmagupta, Bhāskara   While Greek astronomy probably influenced Indian learning, to the point of introducing trigonometry ,  it seems to be the case that Indian mathematics is otherwise an indigenous tradition;  in particular, there is no evidence that Euclid's Elements reached India before the 18th century.
Āryabhaṭa (476–550 AD) showed that pairs of simultaneous congruences     n  ≡   a   1      mod   m     1      {\displaystyle n\equiv a_{1}{\bmod {m}}_{1}}   ,     n  ≡   a   2      mod   m     2      {\displaystyle n\equiv a_{2}{\bmod {m}}_{2}}   could be solved by a method he called kuṭṭaka , or pulveriser ;  this is a procedure close to (a generalisation of) the Euclidean algorithm, which was probably discovered independently in India.
Āryabhaṭa seems to have had in mind applications to astronomical calculations.
Brahmagupta (628 AD) started the systematic study of indefinite quadratic equations—in particular, the misnamed Pell equation , in which Archimedes may have first been interested, and which did not start to be solved in the West until the time of Fermat and Euler.
Later Sanskrit authors would follow, using Brahmagupta's technical terminology.
A general procedure (the chakravala , or "cyclic method") for solving Pell's equation was finally found by Jayadeva (cited in the eleventh century; his work is otherwise lost); the earliest surviving exposition appears in Bhāskara II 's Bīja-gaṇita (twelfth century).
Indian mathematics remained largely unknown in Europe until the late eighteenth century;  Brahmagupta and Bhāskara's work was translated into English in 1817 by Henry Colebrooke .
Arithmetic in the Islamic golden age   Further information: Mathematics in medieval Islam and Islamic Golden Age  Al-Haytham as seen by the West: on the frontispiece of Selenographia Alhasen  represents knowledge through reason and Galileo knowledge through the senses.
In the early ninth century, the caliph Al-Ma'mun ordered translations of many Greek mathematical works and at least one Sanskrit work (the Sindhind , which may  or may not  be Brahmagupta's Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta ).
Diophantus's main work, the Arithmetica , was translated into Arabic by Qusta ibn Luqa (820–912).
Part of the treatise al-Fakhri (by al-Karajī , 953 – ca.
1029) builds on it to some extent.
According to Rashed Roshdi, Al-Karajī's contemporary Ibn al-Haytham knew  what would later be called Wilson's theorem .
Western Europe in the Middle Ages   Other than a treatise on squares in arithmetic progression by Fibonacci —who traveled and studied in north Africa and Constantinople—no number theory to speak of was done in western Europe during the Middle Ages.
Matters started to change in Europe in the late Renaissance , thanks to a renewed study of the works of Greek antiquity.
A catalyst was the textual emendation and translation into Latin of Diophantus' Arithmetica .
Early modern number theory   Fermat   Pierre de Fermat  Pierre de Fermat (1607–1665) never published his writings; in particular, his work on number theory is contained almost entirely in letters to mathematicians and in private marginal notes.
In his notes and letters, he scarcely wrote any proofs—he had no models in the area.
Over his lifetime, Fermat made the following contributions to the field:  One of Fermat's first interests was perfect numbers (which appear in Euclid, Elements IX) and amicable numbers ;  these topics led him to work on integer divisors , which were from the beginning among the subjects of the correspondence (1636 onwards) that put him in touch with the mathematical community of the day.
In 1638, Fermat claimed, without proof, that all whole numbers can be expressed as the sum of four squares or fewer.
Fermat's little theorem (1640):  if a is not divisible by a prime p , then      a   p  −  1    ≡  1   mod   p    .
{\displaystyle a^{p-1}\equiv 1{\bmod {p}}.}
If a and b are coprime , then      a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}}   is not divisible by any prime congruent to −1 modulo 4;  and every prime congruent to 1 modulo 4 can be written in the form      a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}}   .
These two statements also date from 1640; in 1659, Fermat stated to Huygens that he had proven the latter statement by the method of infinite descent .
In 1657, Fermat posed the problem of solving      x   2    −  N   y   2    =  1    {\displaystyle x^{2}-Ny^{2}=1}   as a challenge to English mathematicians.
The problem was solved in a few months by Wallis and Brouncker.
Fermat considered their solution valid, but pointed out they had provided an algorithm without a proof (as had Jayadeva and Bhaskara, though Fermat was not aware of this).
He stated that a proof could be found by infinite descent.
Fermat stated and proved (by infinite descent) in the appendix to Observations on Diophantus (Obs.
XLV)  that      x   4    +   y   4    =   z   4      {\displaystyle x^{4}+y^{4}=z^{4}}   has no non-trivial solutions in the integers.
Fermat also mentioned to his correspondents that      x   3    +   y   3    =   z   3      {\displaystyle x^{3}+y^{3}=z^{3}}   has no non-trivial solutions, and that this could also be proven by infinite descent.
The first known proof is due to Euler (1753; indeed by infinite descent).
Fermat claimed ( Fermat's Last Theorem ) to have shown there are no solutions to      x   n    +   y   n    =   z   n      {\displaystyle x^{n}+y^{n}=z^{n}}   for all     n  ≥  3    {\displaystyle n\geq 3}   ; this claim appears in his annotations in the margins of his copy of Diophantus.
Euler   Leonhard Euler  The interest of Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) in number theory was first spurred in 1729, when a friend of his, the amateur   Goldbach , pointed him towards some of Fermat's work on the subject.
This has been called the "rebirth" of modern number theory,  after Fermat's relative lack of success in getting his contemporaries' attention for the subject.
Euler's work on number theory includes the following:    Proofs for Fermat's statements.
This includes Fermat's little theorem (generalised by Euler to non-prime moduli); the fact that     p  =   x   2    +   y   2      {\displaystyle p=x^{2}+y^{2}}   if and only if     p  ≡  1   mod   4      {\displaystyle p\equiv 1{\bmod {4}}}   ; initial work towards a proof that every integer is the sum of four squares (the first complete proof is by Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1770), soon improved by Euler himself  ); the lack of non-zero integer solutions to      x   4    +   y   4    =   z   2      {\displaystyle x^{4}+y^{4}=z^{2}}   (implying the case n=4 of Fermat's last theorem, the case n=3 of which Euler also proved by a related method).
Pell's equation , first misnamed by Euler.
He wrote on the link between continued fractions and Pell's equation.
First steps towards analytic number theory.
In his work of sums of four squares, partitions , pentagonal numbers , and the distribution of prime numbers, Euler pioneered the use of what can be seen as analysis (in particular, infinite series) in number theory.
Since he lived before the development of complex analysis , most of his work is restricted to the formal manipulation of power series .
He did, however, do some very notable (though not fully rigorous) early work on what would later be called the Riemann zeta function .
Quadratic forms .
Following Fermat's lead, Euler did further research on the question of which primes can be expressed in the form      x   2    +  N   y   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}+Ny^{2}}   , some of it prefiguring quadratic reciprocity .
Diophantine equations .
Euler worked on some Diophantine equations of genus 0 and 1.
In particular, he studied Diophantus's work; he tried to systematise it, but the time was not yet ripe for such an endeavour—algebraic geometry was still in its infancy.
He did notice there was a connection between Diophantine problems and elliptic integrals ,  whose study he had himself initiated.
"Here was a problem, that I, a ten-year-old, could understand, and I knew from that moment that I would never let it go.
I had to solve it."
—Sir Andrew Wiles about his proof of Fermat's Last Theorem .
Lagrange, Legendre, and Gauss   Carl Friedrich Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, first edition  Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736–1813) was the first to give full proofs of some of Fermat's and Euler's work and observations—for instance, the four-square theorem and the basic theory of the misnamed "Pell's equation" (for which an algorithmic solution was found by Fermat and his contemporaries, and also by Jayadeva and Bhaskara II before them.)
He also studied quadratic forms in full generality (as opposed to     m   X   2    +  n   Y   2      {\displaystyle mX^{2}+nY^{2}}   )—defining their equivalence relation, showing how to put them in reduced form, etc.
Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752–1833) was the first to state the law of quadratic reciprocity.
He also conjectured what amounts to the prime number theorem and Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions .
He gave a full treatment of the equation     a   x   2    +  b   y   2    +  c   z   2    =  0    {\displaystyle ax^{2}+by^{2}+cz^{2}=0}    and worked on quadratic forms along the lines later developed fully by Gauss.
In his old age, he was the first to prove Fermat's Last Theorem for     n  =  5    {\displaystyle n=5}   (completing work by Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet , and crediting both him and Sophie Germain ).
Carl Friedrich Gauss  In his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (1798), Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) proved the law of quadratic reciprocity and developed the theory of quadratic forms (in particular, defining their composition).
He also introduced some basic notation ( congruences ) and devoted a section to computational matters, including primality tests.
The last section of the Disquisitiones established a link between roots of unity and number theory:  The theory of the division of the circle...which is treated in sec.
7 does not belong by itself to arithmetic, but its principles can only be drawn from higher arithmetic.
In this way, Gauss arguably made a first foray towards both Évariste Galois 's work and algebraic number theory .
Maturity and division into subfields   Ernst Kummer  Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet  Starting early in the nineteenth century, the following developments gradually took place:  The rise to self-consciousness of number theory (or higher arithmetic ) as a field of study.
The development of much of modern mathematics necessary for basic modern number theory: complex analysis , group theory , Galois theory —accompanied by greater rigor in analysis and abstraction in algebra.
The rough subdivision of number theory into its modern subfields—in particular, analytic and algebraic number theory.
Algebraic number theory may be said to start with the study of reciprocity and cyclotomy , but truly came into its own with the development of abstract algebra and early ideal theory and valuation theory; see below.
A conventional starting point for analytic number theory is Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions (1837),   whose proof introduced L-functions and involved some asymptotic analysis and a limiting process on a real variable.
The first use of analytic ideas in number theory actually goes back to Euler (1730s),   who used formal power series and non-rigorous (or implicit) limiting arguments.
The use of complex analysis in number theory comes later: the work of Bernhard Riemann (1859) on the zeta function is the canonical starting point;   Jacobi's four-square theorem (1839), which predates it, belongs to an initially different strand that has by now taken a leading role in analytic number theory ( modular forms ).
The history of each subfield is briefly addressed in its own section below; see the main article of each subfield for fuller treatments.
Many of the most interesting questions in each area remain open and are being actively worked on.
Main subdivisions   Elementary number theory   The term elementary generally denotes a method that does not use complex analysis .
For example, the prime number theorem was first proven using complex analysis in 1896, but an elementary proof was found only in 1949 by Erdős and Selberg .
The term is somewhat ambiguous: for example, proofs based on complex Tauberian theorems (for example, Wiener–Ikehara ) are often seen as quite enlightening but not elementary, in spite of using Fourier analysis , rather than complex analysis as such.
Here as elsewhere, an elementary proof may be longer and more difficult for most readers than a non-elementary one.
Number theorists Paul Erdős and Terence Tao in 1985, when Erdős was 72 and Tao was 10  Number theory has the reputation of being a field many of whose results can be stated to the layperson.
At the same time, the proofs of these results are not particularly accessible, in part because the range of tools they use is, if anything, unusually broad within mathematics.
Analytic number theory   Main article: Analytic number theory  Riemann zeta function ζ( s ) in the complex plane .
The color of a point s gives the value of ζ( s ): dark colors denote values close to zero and hue gives the value's argument .
The action of the modular group on the upper half plane .
The region in grey is the standard fundamental domain .
Analytic number theory may be defined  in terms of its tools, as the study of the integers by means of tools from real and complex analysis;  or  in terms of its concerns, as the study within number theory of estimates on size and density, as opposed to identities.
Some subjects generally considered to be part of analytic number theory, for example, sieve theory ,  are better covered by the second rather than the first definition: some of sieve theory, for instance, uses little analysis,  yet it does belong to analytic number theory.
The following are examples of problems in analytic number theory: the prime number theorem , the Goldbach conjecture (or the twin prime conjecture , or the Hardy–Littlewood conjectures ), the Waring problem and the Riemann hypothesis .
Some of the most important tools of analytic number theory are the circle method , sieve methods and L-functions (or, rather, the study of their properties).
The theory of modular forms (and, more generally, automorphic forms ) also occupies an increasingly central place in the toolbox of analytic number theory.
One may ask analytic questions about algebraic numbers , and use analytic means to answer such questions; it is thus that algebraic and analytic number theory intersect.
For example, one may define prime ideals (generalizations of prime numbers in the field of algebraic numbers) and ask how many prime ideals there are up to a certain size.
This question can be answered by means of an examination of Dedekind zeta functions , which are generalizations of the Riemann zeta function , a key analytic object at the roots of the subject.
This is an example of a general procedure in analytic number theory: deriving information about the distribution of a sequence (here, prime ideals or prime numbers) from the analytic behavior of an appropriately constructed complex-valued function.
Algebraic number theory   Main article: Algebraic number theory  An algebraic number is any complex number that is a solution to some polynomial equation     f  (  x  )  =  0    {\displaystyle f(x)=0}   with rational coefficients; for example, every solution     x    {\displaystyle x}   of      x   5    +  (  11   /   2  )   x   3    −  7   x   2    +  9  =  0    {\displaystyle x^{5}+(11/2)x^{3}-7x^{2}+9=0}   (say) is an algebraic number.
Fields of algebraic numbers are also called algebraic number fields , or shortly number fields .
Algebraic number theory studies algebraic number fields.
Thus, analytic and algebraic number theory can and do overlap: the former is defined by its methods, the latter by its objects of study.
It could be argued that the simplest kind of number fields (viz., quadratic fields) were already studied by Gauss, as the discussion of quadratic forms in Disquisitiones arithmeticae can be restated in terms of ideals and norms in quadratic fields.
(A quadratic field consists of all
numbers of the form     a  +  b    d      {\displaystyle a+b{\sqrt {d}}}   , where     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   are rational numbers and     d    {\displaystyle d}   is a fixed rational number whose square root is not rational.)
For that matter, the 11th-century chakravala method amounts—in modern terms—to an algorithm for finding the units of a real quadratic number field.
However, neither Bhāskara nor Gauss knew of number fields as such.
The grounds of the subject as we know it were set in the late nineteenth century, when ideal numbers , the theory of ideals and valuation theory were developed; these are three complementary ways of dealing with the lack of unique factorisation in algebraic number fields.
(For example, in the field generated by the rationals
and       −  5      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {-5}}}   , the number     6    {\displaystyle 6}   can be factorised both as     6  =  2  ⋅  3    {\displaystyle 6=2\cdot 3}   and     6  =  (  1  +    −  5    )  (  1  −    −  5    )    {\displaystyle 6=(1+{\sqrt {-5}})(1-{\sqrt {-5}})}   ; all of     2    {\displaystyle 2}   ,     3    {\displaystyle 3}   ,     1  +    −  5      {\displaystyle 1+{\sqrt {-5}}}   and     1  −    −  5      {\displaystyle 1-{\sqrt {-5}}}   are irreducible, and thus, in a naïve sense, analogous to primes among the integers.)
The initial impetus for the development of ideal numbers (by Kummer ) seems to have come from the study of higher reciprocity laws,  that is, generalisations of quadratic reciprocity .
Number fields are often studied as extensions of smaller number fields: a field L is said to be an extension of a field K if L contains K .
(For example, the complex numbers C are an extension of the reals R , and the reals R are an extension of the rationals Q .)
Classifying the possible extensions of a given number field is a difficult and partially open problem.
Abelian extensions—that is, extensions L of K such that the Galois group  Gal( L / K ) of L over K is an abelian group —are relatively well understood.
Their classification was the object of the programme of class field theory , which was initiated in the late 19th century (partly by Kronecker and Eisenstein ) and carried out largely in 1900–1950.
An example of an active area of research in algebraic number theory is Iwasawa theory .
The Langlands program , one of the main current large-scale research plans in mathematics, is sometimes described as an attempt to generalise class field theory to non-abelian extensions of number fields.
Diophantine geometry   Main article: Diophantine geometry  The central problem of Diophantine geometry is to determine when a Diophantine equation has solutions, and if it does, how many.
The approach taken is to think of the solutions of an equation as a geometric object.
For example, an equation in two variables defines a curve in the plane.
More generally, an equation, or system of equations, in two or more variables defines a curve , a surface or some other such object in n -dimensional space.
In Diophantine geometry, one asks whether there are any rational points (points all of whose coordinates are rationals) or integral points (points all of whose coordinates are integers) on the curve or surface.
If there are any such points, the next step is to ask how many there are and how they are distributed.
A basic question in this direction is if there are finitely
or infinitely many rational points on a given curve (or surface).
In the Pythagorean equation       x   2    +   y   2    =  1  ,    {\displaystyle x^{2}+y^{2}=1,}   we would like to study its rational solutions, that is, its solutions     (  x  ,  y  )    {\displaystyle (x,y)}   such that x and y are both rational.
This is the same as asking for all integer solutions
to      a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2}}   ; any solution to the latter equation gives us a solution     x  =  a   /   c    {\displaystyle x=a/c}   ,     y  =  b   /   c    {\displaystyle y=b/c}   to the former.
It is also the
same as asking for all points with rational coordinates on the curve described by      x   2    +   y   2    =  1    {\displaystyle x^{2}+y^{2}=1}   .
(This curve happens to be a circle of radius 1 around the origin.)
Two examples of an elliptic curve , that is, a curve of genus 1 having at least one rational point.
(Either graph can be seen as a slice of a torus in four-dimensional space.)
The rephrasing of questions on equations in terms of points on curves turns out to be felicitous.
The finiteness or not of the number of rational or integer points on an algebraic curve—that is, rational or integer solutions to an equation     f  (  x  ,  y  )  =  0    {\displaystyle f(x,y)=0}   , where     f    {\displaystyle f}   is a polynomial in two variables—turns out to depend crucially on the genus of the curve.
The genus can be defined as follows:  allow the variables in     f  (  x  ,  y  )  =  0    {\displaystyle f(x,y)=0}   to be complex numbers; then     f  (  x  ,  y  )  =  0    {\displaystyle f(x,y)=0}   defines a 2-dimensional surface in (projective) 4-dimensional space (since two complex variables can be decomposed into four real variables, that is, four dimensions).
If we count the number of (doughnut) holes in the surface; we call this number the genus of     f  (  x  ,  y  )  =  0    {\displaystyle f(x,y)=0}   .
Other geometrical notions turn out to be just as crucial.
There is also the closely linked area of Diophantine approximations : given a number     x    {\displaystyle x}   , then finding how well can it be approximated by rationals.
(We are looking for approximations that are good relative to the amount of space that it takes to write the rational: call     a   /   q    {\displaystyle a/q}   (with     gcd  (  a  ,  q  )  =  1    {\displaystyle \gcd(a,q)=1}   ) a good approximation to     x    {\displaystyle x}   if      |   x  −  a   /   q   |   <    1   q   c        {\displaystyle |x-a/q|<{\frac {1}{q^{c}}}}   , where     c    {\displaystyle c}   is large.)
This question is of special interest if     x    {\displaystyle x}   is an algebraic number.
If     x    {\displaystyle x}   cannot be well approximated, then some equations do not have integer or rational solutions.
Moreover, several concepts (especially that of height ) turn out to be critical both in Diophantine geometry and in the study of Diophantine approximations.
This question is also of special interest in transcendental number theory : if a number can be better approximated than any algebraic number, then it is a transcendental number .
It is by this argument that π and e have been shown to be transcendental.
Diophantine geometry should not be confused with the geometry of numbers , which is a collection of graphical methods for answering certain questions in algebraic number theory.
Arithmetic geometry , however, is a contemporary term for much the same domain as that covered by the term Diophantine geometry .
The term arithmetic geometry is arguably used most often when one wishes to emphasise the connections to modern algebraic geometry (as in, for instance, Faltings's theorem ) rather than to techniques in Diophantine approximations.
Other subfields   The areas below date from no earlier than the mid-twentieth century, even if they are based on older material.
For example, as is explained below, the matter of algorithms in number theory is very old, in some sense older than the concept of proof; at the same time, the modern study of computability dates only from the 1930s and 1940s, and computational complexity theory from the 1970s.
Probabilistic number theory   Main article: Probabilistic number theory  Much of probabilistic number theory can be seen as an important special case of the study of variables that are almost, but not quite, mutually independent .
For example, the event that a random integer between one and a million be divisible by two and the event that it be divisible by three are almost independent, but not quite.
It is sometimes said that probabilistic combinatorics uses the fact that whatever happens with probability greater than     0    {\displaystyle 0}   must happen sometimes; one may say with equal justice that many applications of probabilistic number theory hinge on the fact that whatever is unusual must be rare.
If certain algebraic objects (say, rational or integer solutions to certain equations) can be shown to be in the tail of certain sensibly defined distributions, it follows that there must be few of them; this is a very concrete non-probabilistic statement following from a probabilistic one.
At times, a non-rigorous, probabilistic approach leads to a number of heuristic algorithms and open problems, notably Cramér's conjecture .
Arithmetic combinatorics   Main articles: Arithmetic combinatorics and Additive number theory  If we begin from a fairly "thick" infinite set      A    {\displaystyle A}   , does it contain many elements in arithmetic progression:     a    {\displaystyle a}   ,     a  +  b  ,  a  +  2  b  ,  a  +  3  b  ,  …  ,  a  +  10  b    {\displaystyle a+b,a+2b,a+3b,\ldots ,a+10b}   , say?
Should it be possible to write large integers as sums of elements of     A    {\displaystyle A}   ?
These questions are characteristic of arithmetic combinatorics .
This is a presently coalescing field; it subsumes additive number theory (which concerns itself with certain very specific sets     A    {\displaystyle A}   of arithmetic significance, such as the primes or the squares) and, arguably, some of the geometry of numbers , together with some rapidly developing new material.
Its focus on issues of growth and distribution accounts in part for its developing links with ergodic theory , finite group theory , model theory , and other fields.
The term additive combinatorics is also used; however, the sets     A    {\displaystyle A}   being studied need not be sets of integers, but rather subsets of non-commutative groups , for which the multiplication symbol, not the addition symbol, is traditionally used; they can also be subsets of rings , in which case the growth of     A  +  A    {\displaystyle A+A}   and     A    {\displaystyle A}   ·     A    {\displaystyle A}   may be compared.
Computational number theory   Main article: Computational number theory A Lehmer sieve , a primitive digital computer used to find primes and solve simple Diophantine equations While the word algorithm goes back only to certain readers of al-Khwārizmī , careful descriptions of methods of solution are older than proofs: such methods (that is, algorithms) are as old as any recognisable mathematics—ancient Egyptian, Babylonian, Vedic, Chinese—whereas proofs appeared only with the Greeks of the classical period.
An early case is that of what we now call the Euclidean algorithm.
In its basic form (namely, as an algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor ) it appears as Proposition 2 of Book VII in Elements , together with a proof of correctness.
However, in the form that is often used in number theory (namely, as an algorithm for finding integer solutions to an equation     a  x  +  b  y  =  c    {\displaystyle ax+by=c}   , or, what is the same, for finding the quantities whose existence is assured by the Chinese remainder theorem ) it first appears in the works of Āryabhaṭa (5th–6th century CE) as an algorithm called kuṭṭaka ("pulveriser"), without a proof of correctness.
There are two main questions: "Can we compute this?"
and "Can we compute it rapidly?"
Anyone can test whether a number is prime or, if it is not, split it into prime factors; doing so rapidly is another matter.
We now know fast algorithms for testing primality , but, in spite of much work (both theoretical and practical), no truly fast algorithm for factoring.
The difficulty of a computation can be useful: modern protocols for encrypting messages (for example, RSA ) depend on functions that are known to all, but whose inverses are known only to a chosen few, and would take one too long a time to figure out on one's own.
For example, these functions can be such that their inverses can be computed only if certain large integers are factorized.
While many difficult computational problems outside number theory are known, most working encryption protocols nowadays are based on the difficulty of a few number-theoretical problems.
Some things may not be computable at all; in fact, this can be proven in some instances.
For instance, in 1970, it was proven, as a solution to Hilbert's tenth problem , that there is no Turing machine which can solve all Diophantine equations.
In particular, this means that, given a computably enumerable set of axioms, there are Diophantine equations for which there is no proof, starting from the axioms, of whether the set of equations has or does not have integer solutions.
(We would necessarily be speaking of Diophantine equations for which there are no integer solutions, since, given a Diophantine equation with at least one solution, the solution itself provides a proof of the fact that a solution exists.
We cannot prove that a particular Diophantine equation is of this kind, since this would imply that it has no solutions.)
Applications   The number-theorist Leonard Dickson (1874–1954) said "Thank God that number theory is unsullied by any application".
Such a view is no longer applicable to number theory.
In 1974, Donald Knuth said "virtually every theorem in elementary number theory arises in a natural, motivated way in connection with the problem of making computers do high-speed numerical calculations".
Elementary number theory is taught in discrete mathematics courses for computer scientists ; on the other hand, number theory also has applications to the continuous in numerical analysis .
Number theory has now several modern applications spanning diverse areas such as:  Cryptography : Public-key encryption schemes such as RSA are based on the difficulty of factoring large composite numbers into their prime factors.
Computer science : The fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm, which is used to efficiently compute the discrete Fourier transform, has important applications in signal processing and data analysis.
Physics : The Riemann hypothesis has connections to the distribution of prime numbers and has been studied for its potential implications in physics.
Error correction codes : The theory of finite fields and algebraic geometry have been used to construct efficient error-correcting codes.
Communications: The design of cellular telephone networks requires knowledge of the theory of modular forms , which is a part of analytic number theory.
Study of musical scales: the concept of " equal temperament ", which is the basis for most modern Western music, involves dividing the octave into 12 equal parts.
This has been studied using number theory and in particular the properties of the 12th root of 2.
Prizes   The American Mathematical Society awards the Cole Prize in Number Theory .
Moreover, number theory is one of the three mathematical subdisciplines rewarded by the Fermat Prize .
Unique positive real number which when multiplied by itself gives 2  "Pythagoras's constant" redirects here.
Not to be confused with Pythagoras number .
Square root of 2 The square root of 2 is equal to the length of the hypotenuse of an isosceles  right triangle with legs of length 1.
Representations Decimal 1.41421 35623 73095 0488...
Continued fraction     1  +          1           2  +          1           2  +          1           2  +          1           2  +  ⋱                        {\displaystyle 1+{\cfrac {1}{2+{\cfrac {1}{2+{\cfrac {1}{2+{\cfrac {1}{2+\ddots }}}}}}}}}    The square root of 2 (approximately 1.4142) is a positive real number that, when multiplied by itself or squared, equals the number 2 .
It may be written in mathematics as       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   or      2   1   /   2      {\displaystyle 2^{1/2}}   .
It is an algebraic number , and therefore not a transcendental number .
Technically, it should be called the principal square root of 2, to distinguish it from the negative number with the same property.
Geometrically, the square root of 2 is the length of a diagonal across a square with sides of one unit of length ; this follows from the Pythagorean theorem .
It was probably the first number known to be irrational .
The fraction 99 / 70 (≈ 1.4142 857) is sometimes used as a good rational approximation with a reasonably small denominator .
Sequence A002193 in the On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences consists of the digits in the decimal expansion of the square root of 2, here truncated to 65 decimal places:    1.41421 35623 73095 04880 16887 24209 69807 85696 71875 37694 80731 76679 73799   History   Babylonian clay tablet YBC 7289 with annotations.
Besides showing the square root of 2 in sexagesimal ( 1 24 51 10 ), the tablet also gives an example where one side of the square is 30 and the diagonal then is 42 25 35 .
The sexagesimal digit 30 can also stand for 0 30 = 1 / 2 , in which case 0 42 25 35 is approximately 0.7071065.
The Babylonian clay tablet YBC 7289 ( c.
1800 –1600 BC) gives an approximation of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   in four sexagesimal figures, 1 24 51 10 , which is accurate to about six decimal digits,  and is the closest possible three-place sexagesimal representation of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   :      1  +    24  60    +    51   60   2      +    10   60   3      =    305470  216000    =  1.41421    296  ¯    .
{\displaystyle 1+{\frac {24}{60}}+{\frac {51}{60^{2}}}+{\frac {10}{60^{3}}}={\frac {305470}{216000}}=1.41421{\overline {296}}.}
Another early approximation is given in ancient Indian mathematical texts, the Sulbasutras ( c.
800 –200 BC), as follows: Increase the length  by its third and this third by its own fourth less the thirty-fourth part of that fourth.
That is,      1  +    1  3    +    1   3  ×  4     −    1   3  ×  4  ×  34     =    577  408    =  1.41421    56862745098039  ¯    .
{\displaystyle 1+{\frac {1}{3}}+{\frac {1}{3\times 4}}-{\frac {1}{3\times 4\times 34}}={\frac {577}{408}}=1.41421{\overline {56862745098039}}.}
This approximation is the seventh in a sequence of increasingly accurate approximations based on the sequence of Pell numbers , which can be derived from the continued fraction expansion of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   .
Despite having a smaller denominator, it is only slightly less accurate than the Babylonian approximation.
Pythagoreans discovered that the diagonal of a square is incommensurable with its side, or in modern language, that the square root of two is irrational .
Little is known with certainty about the time or circumstances of this discovery, but the name of Hippasus of Metapontum is often mentioned.
For a while, the Pythagoreans treated as an official secret the discovery that the square root of two is irrational, and, according to legend, Hippasus was murdered for divulging it.
The square root of two is occasionally called Pythagoras's number or Pythagoras's constant , for example by Conway & Guy (1996) .
Ancient Roman architecture   In ancient Roman architecture , Vitruvius describes the use of the square root of 2 progression or ad quadratum technique.
It consists basically in a geometric, rather than arithmetic, method to double a square, in which the diagonal of the original square is equal to the side of the resulting square.
Vitruvius attributes the idea to Plato .
The system was employed to build pavements by creating a square tangent to the corners of the original square at 45 degrees of it.
The proportion was also used to design atria by giving them a length equal to a diagonal taken from a square, whose sides are equivalent to the intended atrium's width.
Decimal value   Computation algorithms   Further information: Methods of computing square roots  There are many algorithms for approximating       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   as a ratio of integers or as a decimal.
The most common algorithm for this, which is used as a basis in many computers and calculators, is the Babylonian method  for computing square roots, an example of Newton's method for computing roots of arbitrary functions.
It goes as follows: First, pick a guess,      a   0    >  0    {\displaystyle a_{0}>0}   ; the value of the guess affects only how many iterations are required to reach an approximation of a certain accuracy.
Then, using that guess, iterate through the following recursive computation:       a   n  +  1    =    1  2     (    a   n    +     2   a   n        )   =     a   n    2    +    1   a   n      .
{\displaystyle a_{n+1}={\frac {1}{2}}\left(a_{n}+{\dfrac {2}{a_{n}}}\right)={\frac {a_{n}}{2}}+{\frac {1}{a_{n}}}.}
Each iteration improves the approximation, roughly doubling the number of correct digits.
Starting with      a   0    =  1    {\displaystyle a_{0}=1}   , the subsequent iterations yield:           a   1       =     3  2         =   1   .5  ,       a   2       =     17  12         =   1.41   6  …  ,       a   3       =     577  408         =   1.41421   5  …  ,       a   4       =     665857  470832         =   1.41421356237   46  …  ,         ⋮        {\displaystyle {\begin{alignedat}{3}a_{1}&={\tfrac {3}{2}}&&=\mathbf {1} .5,\\a_{2}&={\tfrac {17}{12}}&&=\mathbf {1.41} 6\ldots ,\\a_{3}&={\tfrac {577}{408}}&&=\mathbf {1.41421} 5\ldots ,\\a_{4}&={\tfrac {665857}{470832}}&&=\mathbf {1.41421356237} 46\ldots ,\\&\qquad \vdots \end{alignedat}}}    Rational approximations   A simple rational approximation 99 / 70 (≈ 1.4142 857) is sometimes used.
Despite having a denominator of only 70, it differs from the correct value by less than 1 / 10,000 (approx.
+0.72 × 10 −4 ).
The next two better rational approximations are 140 / 99 (≈ 1.414 1414...) with a marginally smaller error (approx.
−0.72 × 10 −4 ), and 239 / 169 (≈ 1.4142 012) with an error of approx −0.12 × 10 −4 .
The rational approximation of the square root of two derived from four iterations of the Babylonian method after starting with a 0 = 1 ( 665,857 / 470,832 ) is too large by about 1.6 × 10 −12 ; its square is ≈ 2.000 000 000 0045 .
Records in computation   In 1997, the value of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   was calculated to 137,438,953,444 decimal places by Yasumasa Kanada 's team.
In February 2006, the record for the calculation of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   was eclipsed with the use of a home computer.
Shigeru Kondo calculated one trillion decimal places in 2010.
Among mathematical constants with computationally challenging decimal expansions, only π , e , and the golden ratio have been calculated more precisely as of March 2022  .
Such computations aim to check empirically whether such numbers are normal .
This is a table of recent records in calculating the digits of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   .
Date  Name  Number of digits   January 5, 2022  Tizian Hanselmann  10 000 000 001 000    June 28, 2016  Ron Watkins  10 000 000 000 000    April 3, 2016  Ron Watkins  5 000 000 000 000    January 20, 2016  Ron Watkins  2 000 000 000 100    February 9, 2012  Alexander Yee  2 000 000 000 050    March 22, 2010  Shigeru Kondo  1 000 000 000 000   Proofs of irrationality   A short proof of the irrationality of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   can be obtained from the rational root theorem , that is, if     p  (  x  )    {\displaystyle p(x)}   is a monic polynomial with integer coefficients , then any rational  root of     p  (  x  )    {\displaystyle p(x)}   is necessarily an integer.
Applying this to the polynomial     p  (  x  )  =   x   2    −  2    {\displaystyle p(x)=x^{2}-2}   , it follows that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is either an integer or irrational.
Because       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is not an integer (2 is not a perfect square ),       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   must therefore be irrational.
This proof can be generalized to show that any square root of any natural number that is not a perfect square is irrational.
For other proofs that the square root of any non-square natural number is irrational, see Quadratic irrational number or Infinite descent .
Proof by infinite descent   One proof of the number's irrationality is the following proof by infinite descent .
It is also a proof of a negation by refutation : it proves the statement "       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is not rational" by assuming that it is rational and then deriving a falsehood.
Assume that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is a rational number, meaning that there exists a pair of integers whose ratio is exactly       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   .
If the two integers have a common factor , it can be eliminated using the Euclidean algorithm .
Then       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   can be written as an irreducible fraction        a  b      {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}}   such that a and b are coprime integers (having no common factor) which additionally means that at least one of a or b must be odd .
It follows that        a   2     b   2      =  2    {\displaystyle {\frac {a^{2}}{b^{2}}}=2}   and      a   2    =  2   b   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}=2b^{2}}   .
( ( a / b ) n = a n / b n )   ( a 2 and b 2 are integers)  Therefore, a 2 is even because it is equal to 2 b 2 .
( 2 b 2 is necessarily even because it is 2 times another whole number.)
It follows that a must be even (as squares of odd integers are never even).
Because a is even, there exists an integer k that fulfills     a  =  2  k    {\displaystyle a=2k}   .
Substituting 2 k from step 7 for a in the second equation of step 4:     2   b   2    =   a   2    =  (  2  k   )   2    =  4   k   2      {\displaystyle 2b^{2}=a^{2}=(2k)^{2}=4k^{2}}   , which is equivalent to      b   2    =  2   k   2      {\displaystyle b^{2}=2k^{2}}   .
Because 2 k 2 is divisible by two and therefore even, and because     2   k   2    =   b   2      {\displaystyle 2k^{2}=b^{2}}   , it follows that b 2 is also even which means that b is even.
By steps 5 and 8, a and b are both even, which contradicts step 3 (that       a  b      {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}}   is irreducible).
Since we have derived a falsehood, the assumption (1) that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is a rational number must be false.
This means that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is not a rational number; that is to say,       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational.
This proof was hinted at by Aristotle , in his Analytica Priora , §I.23.
It appeared first as a full proof in Euclid 's Elements , as proposition 117 of Book X.
However, since the early 19th century, historians have agreed that this proof is an interpolation and not attributable to Euclid.
Proof by unique factorization   As with the proof by infinite descent, we obtain      a   2    =  2   b   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}=2b^{2}}   .
Being the same quantity, each side has the same prime factorization by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic , and in particular, would have to have the factor 2 occur the same number of times.
However, the factor 2 appears an odd number of times on the right, but an even number of times on the left—a contradiction.
Geometric proof   Figure 1.
Stanley Tennenbaum's geometric proof of the irrationality of √ 2  A simple proof is attributed to Stanley Tennenbaum when he was a student in the early 1950s.
Given two squares with integer sides respectively a and b , one of which has twice the area of the other, place two copies of the smaller square in the larger as shown in Figure 1.
The square overlap region in the middle (     (  2  b  −  a   )   2      {\displaystyle (2b-a)^{2}}   ) must equal the sum of the two uncovered squares (     2  (  a  −  b   )   2      {\displaystyle 2(a-b)^{2}}   ).
However, these squares on the diagonal have positive integer sides that are smaller than the original squares.
Repeating this process, there are arbitrarily small squares one twice the area of the other, yet both having positive integer sides, which is impossible since positive integers cannot be less than 1.
Figure 2.
Tom Apostol's geometric proof of the irrationality of √ 2  Tom M.
Apostol made another geometric reductio ad absurdum argument showing that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational.
It is also an example of proof by infinite descent.
It makes use of classic compass and straightedge construction, proving the theorem by a method similar to that employed by ancient Greek geometers.
It is essentially the same algebraic proof as in the previous paragraph, viewed geometrically in  another way.
Let △ ABC be a right isosceles triangle with hypotenuse length m and legs n as shown in Figure 2.
By the Pythagorean theorem ,       m  n    =    2      {\displaystyle {\frac {m}{n}}={\sqrt {2}}}   .
Suppose m and n are integers.
Let m : n be a ratio given in its lowest terms .
Draw the arcs BD and CE with centre A .
Join DE .
It follows that AB = AD , AC = AE and ∠ BAC and ∠ DAE coincide.
Therefore, the triangles  ABC and ADE are congruent by SAS .
Because ∠ EBF is a right angle and ∠ BEF is half a right angle, △ BEF is also a right isosceles triangle.
Hence BE = m − n implies BF = m − n .
By symmetry, DF = m − n , and △ FDC is also a right isosceles triangle.
It also follows that FC = n − ( m − n ) = 2 n − m .
Hence, there is an even smaller right isosceles triangle, with hypotenuse length 2 n − m and legs m − n .
These values are integers even smaller than m and n and in the same ratio, contradicting the hypothesis that m : n is in lowest terms.
Therefore, m and n cannot be both integers; hence,       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational.
Constructive proof   While the proofs by infinite descent are constructively valid when "irrational" is defined to mean "not rational", we can obtain a constructively stronger statement by using a positive definition of "irrational" as "quantifiably apart from every rational".
Let a and b be positive integers such that 1< a / b < 3/2 (as 1<2< 9/4 satisfies these bounds).
Now 2 b 2  and a 2  cannot be equal, since the first has an odd number of factors 2 whereas the second has an even number of factors 2.
Thus | 2 b 2 − a 2 | ≥ 1 .
Multiplying the absolute difference | √ 2 − a / b | by  b 2 ( √ 2 + a / b ) in the numerator and denominator, we get         |     2    −    a  b     |   =      |   2   b   2    −   a   2     |      b   2      (     2    +    a  b     )      ≥    1    b   2      (     2    +    a  b     )      ≥    1   3   b   2       ,    {\displaystyle \left|{\sqrt {2}}-{\frac {a}{b}}\right|={\frac {|2b^{2}-a^{2}|}{b^{2}\!\left({\sqrt {2}}+{\frac {a}{b}}\right)}}\geq {\frac {1}{b^{2}\!\left({\sqrt {2}}+{\frac {a}{b}}\right)}}\geq {\frac {1}{3b^{2}}},}    the latter inequality being true because it is assumed that 1< a / b < 3/2 , giving a / b + √ 2 ≤ 3 (otherwise the quantitative apartness can be trivially established).
This gives a lower bound of 1 / 3 b 2 for the difference | √ 2 − a / b | , yielding a direct proof of irrationality in its constructively stronger form, not relying on the law of excluded middle ; see Errett Bishop (1985, p.
18).
This proof constructively exhibits an explicit discrepancy between       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   and any rational.
Proof by Pythagorean triples   This proof uses the following property of primitive Pythagorean triples :  If a , b , and c are coprime positive integers such that a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , then c is never even.
This lemma can be used to show that two identical perfect squares can never be added to produce another perfect square.
Suppose the contrary that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is rational.
Therefore,        2    =    a  b      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}={a \over b}}    where     a  ,  b  ∈   Z     {\displaystyle a,b\in \mathbb {Z} }   and     gcd  (  a  ,  b  )  =  1    {\displaystyle \gcd(a,b)=1}    Squaring both sides,      2  =     a   2     b   2        {\displaystyle 2={a^{2} \over b^{2}}}        2   b   2    =   a   2      {\displaystyle 2b^{2}=a^{2}}         b   2    +   b   2    =   a   2      {\displaystyle b^{2}+b^{2}=a^{2}}    Here, (b, b, a) is a primitive Pythagorean triple, and from the lemma a is never even.
However, this contradicts the equation 2 b 2 = a 2 which implies that a must be even.
Multiplicative inverse   The multiplicative inverse (reciprocal) of the square root of two (i.e., the square root of 1 / 2 ) is a widely used constant .
1   2     =     2   2    =  sin  ⁡   45   ∘    =  cos  ⁡   45   ∘    =    {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\sqrt {2}}}={\frac {\sqrt {2}}{2}}=\sin 45^{\circ }=\cos 45^{\circ }=}    0.707 106 781 186 547 524 400 844 362 104 849 039 284 835 937 688 47 ...
  (sequence A010503 in the OEIS )  One-half of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   , also the reciprocal of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   , is a common quantity in geometry and trigonometry because the unit vector that makes a 45° angle with the axes in a plane has the coordinates       (      2   2    ,     2   2     )    .
{\displaystyle \left({\frac {\sqrt {2}}{2}},{\frac {\sqrt {2}}{2}}\right)\!.}
This number satisfies         1  2       2    =      1  2      =    1   2     =  cos  ⁡   45   ∘    =  sin  ⁡   45   ∘    .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2}}={\sqrt {\tfrac {1}{2}}}={\frac {1}{\sqrt {2}}}=\cos 45^{\circ }=\sin 45^{\circ }.}
Properties   Angle size and sector area are the same when the conic radius is √ 2 .
This diagram illustrates the circular and hyperbolic functions based on sector areas u .
One interesting property of       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is           1     2    −  1     =    2    +  1    {\displaystyle \!\ {1 \over {{\sqrt {2}}-1}}={\sqrt {2}}+1}    since       (     2    +  1   )     (     2    −  1   )   =  2  −  1  =  1.
{\displaystyle \left({\sqrt {2}}+1\right)\!\left({\sqrt {2}}-1\right)=2-1=1.}
This is related to the property of silver ratios .
2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   can also be expressed in terms of copies of the imaginary unit  i using only the square root and arithmetic operations , if the square root symbol is interpreted suitably for the complex numbers  i and − i :           i    +  i    i     i     and        −  i    −  i    −  i      −  i       {\displaystyle {\frac {{\sqrt {i}}+i{\sqrt {i}}}{i}}{\text{ and }}{\frac {{\sqrt {-i}}-i{\sqrt {-i}}}{-i}}}          2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is also the only real number other than 1 whose infinite tetrate (i.e., infinite exponential tower) is equal to its square.
In other words: if for c > 1 , x 1 = c and x n +1 = c x n for n > 1 , the limit of x n as n → ∞ will be called (if this limit exists) f ( c ) .
Then       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is the only number c > 1 for which f ( c ) = c 2 .
Or symbolically:         2        2        2        ⋅      ⋅     ⋅            =  2.
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{{\sqrt {2}}^{{\sqrt {2}}^{~\cdot ^{~\cdot ^{~\cdot }}}}}=2.}
2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   appears in Viète's formula for π ,        2  π    =     1  2     ⋅      1  2    +    1  2       1  2       ⋅      1  2    +    1  2        1  2    +    1  2       1  2         ⋯  ,    {\displaystyle {\frac {2}{\pi }}={\sqrt {\frac {1}{2}}}\cdot {\sqrt {{\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {\frac {1}{2}}}}}\cdot {\sqrt {{\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {{\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {\frac {1}{2}}}}}}}\cdots ,}    which is related to the formula        π  =   lim   m  →  ∞     2   m        2  −    2  +    2  +    2  +  ⋯  +    2           ⏟     m   square roots      .
{\displaystyle \pi =\lim _{m\to \infty }2^{m}\underbrace {\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+\cdots +{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}}} _{m{\text{ square roots}}}\,.}
Similar in appearance but with a finite number of terms,       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   appears in various trigonometric constants :            sin  ⁡    π  32       =     1  2       2  −    2  +    2  +    2             sin  ⁡     3  π   16       =     1  2       2  −    2  −    2           sin  ⁡     11  π   32       =     1  2       2  +    2  −    2  −    2              sin  ⁡    π  16       =     1  2       2  −    2  +    2           sin  ⁡     7  π   32       =     1  2       2  −    2  −    2  +    2             sin  ⁡     3  π   8       =     1  2       2  +    2          sin  ⁡     3  π   32       =     1  2       2  −    2  +    2  −    2             sin  ⁡    π  4       =     1  2       2       sin  ⁡     13  π   32       =     1  2       2  +    2  +    2  −    2              sin  ⁡    π  8       =     1  2       2  −    2         sin  ⁡     9  π   32       =     1  2       2  +    2  −    2  +    2             sin  ⁡     7  π   16       =     1  2       2  +    2  +    2            sin  ⁡     5  π   32       =     1  2       2  −    2  −    2  −    2             sin  ⁡     5  π   16       =     1  2       2  +    2  −    2           sin  ⁡     15  π   32       =     1  2       2  +    2  +    2  +    2                {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\sin {\frac {\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {3\pi }{16}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {11\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}\\\sin {\frac {\pi }{16}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {7\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {3\pi }{8}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}\\\sin {\frac {3\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {\pi }{4}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2}}&\quad \sin {\frac {13\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}\\\sin {\frac {\pi }{8}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {9\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {7\pi }{16}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}}}\\\sin {\frac {5\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {5\pi }{16}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2-{\sqrt {2}}}}}}&\quad \sin {\frac {15\pi }{32}}&={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2+{\sqrt {2}}}}}}}}\end{aligned}}}    It is not known whether       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is a normal number , which is a stronger property than irrationality, but statistical analyses of its binary expansion are consistent with the hypothesis that it is normal to base two .
Representations   Series and product   The identity cos π / 4 = sin π / 4 = 1 / √ 2 , along with the infinite product representations for the sine and cosine , leads to products such as        1   2     =   ∏   k  =  0    ∞     (   1  −    1   (  4  k  +  2   )   2        )   =   (   1  −    1  4     )     (   1  −    1  36     )     (   1  −    1  100     )   ⋯    {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\sqrt {2}}}=\prod _{k=0}^{\infty }\left(1-{\frac {1}{(4k+2)^{2}}}\right)=\left(1-{\frac {1}{4}}\right)\!\left(1-{\frac {1}{36}}\right)\!\left(1-{\frac {1}{100}}\right)\cdots }    and        2    =   ∏   k  =  0    ∞       (  4  k  +  2   )   2      (  4  k  +  1  )  (  4  k  +  3  )     =   (     2  ⋅  2    1  ⋅  3     )     (     6  ⋅  6    5  ⋅  7     )     (     10  ⋅  10    9  ⋅  11     )     (     14  ⋅  14    13  ⋅  15     )   ⋯    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}=\prod _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {(4k+2)^{2}}{(4k+1)(4k+3)}}=\left({\frac {2\cdot 2}{1\cdot 3}}\right)\!\left({\frac {6\cdot 6}{5\cdot 7}}\right)\!\left({\frac {10\cdot 10}{9\cdot 11}}\right)\!\left({\frac {14\cdot 14}{13\cdot 15}}\right)\cdots }    or equivalently,        2    =   ∏   k  =  0    ∞     (   1  +    1   4  k  +  1      )    (   1  −    1   4  k  +  3      )   =   (   1  +    1  1     )     (   1  −    1  3     )     (   1  +    1  5     )     (   1  −    1  7     )   ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}=\prod _{k=0}^{\infty }\left(1+{\frac {1}{4k+1}}\right)\left(1-{\frac {1}{4k+3}}\right)=\left(1+{\frac {1}{1}}\right)\!\left(1-{\frac {1}{3}}\right)\!\left(1+{\frac {1}{5}}\right)\!\left(1-{\frac {1}{7}}\right)\cdots .}
The number can also be expressed by taking the Taylor series of a trigonometric function .
For example, the series for cos π / 4 gives        1   2     =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (  −  1   )   k      (    π  4    )    2  k      (  2  k  )  !
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\sqrt {2}}}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {(-1)^{k}\left({\frac {\pi }{4}}\right)^{2k}}{(2k)!}}.}
The Taylor series of √ 1 + x with x = 1 and using the double factorial  n !
gives        2    =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞    (  −  1   )   k  +  1       (  2  k  −  3  )  !
(  2  k  )  !
=  1  +    1  2    −    1   2  ⋅  4     +     1  ⋅  3    2  ⋅  4  ⋅  6     −     1  ⋅  3  ⋅  5    2  ⋅  4  ⋅  6  ⋅  8     +  ⋯  =  1  +    1  2    −    1  8    +    1  16    −    5  128    +    7  256    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }(-1)^{k+1}{\frac {(2k-3)!!}{(2k)!!
}}=1+{\frac {1}{2}}-{\frac {1}{2\cdot 4}}+{\frac {1\cdot 3}{2\cdot 4\cdot 6}}-{\frac {1\cdot 3\cdot 5}{2\cdot 4\cdot 6\cdot 8}}+\cdots =1+{\frac {1}{2}}-{\frac {1}{8}}+{\frac {1}{16}}-{\frac {5}{128}}+{\frac {7}{256}}+\cdots .}
The convergence of this series can be accelerated with an Euler transform , producing        2    =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (  2  k  +  1  )  !
2   3  k  +  1    (  k  !   )
2       =    1  2    +    3  8    +    15  64    +    35  256    +    315  4096    +    693  16384    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {(2k+1)!}{2^{3k+1}(k!
)^{2}}}={\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {3}{8}}+{\frac {15}{64}}+{\frac {35}{256}}+{\frac {315}{4096}}+{\frac {693}{16384}}+\cdots .}
It is not known whether       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   can be represented with a BBP-type formula .
BBP-type formulas are known for π √ 2 and √ 2  ln (1+ √ 2 ) , however.
The number can be represented by an infinite series of Egyptian fractions , with denominators defined by 2 n th terms of a Fibonacci -like recurrence relation  a ( n ) = 34 a ( n −1) − a ( n −2), a (0) = 0, a (1) = 6.
2    =    3  2    −    1  2     ∑   n  =  0    ∞      1   a  (   2   n    )     =    3  2    −    1  2     (     1  6    +    1  204    +    1  235416    +  …   )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}={\frac {3}{2}}-{\frac {1}{2}}\sum _{n=0}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{a(2^{n})}}={\frac {3}{2}}-{\frac {1}{2}}\left({\frac {1}{6}}+{\frac {1}{204}}+{\frac {1}{235416}}+\dots \right)}    Continued fraction   The square root of 2 and approximations by convergents of continued fractions  The square root of two has the following continued fraction representation:        2    =  1  +          1           2  +          1           2  +          1           2  +  ⋱                 .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}=1+{\cfrac {1}{2+{\cfrac {1}{2+{\cfrac {1}{2+\ddots }}}}}}.}
The convergents  p / q formed by truncating this representation form a sequence of fractions that approximate the square root of two to increasing accuracy, and that are described by the Pell numbers (i.e., p 2 − 2 q 2 = ±1 ).
The first convergents are: 1 / 1 , 3 / 2 , 7 / 5 , 17 / 12 , 41 / 29 , 99 / 70 , 239 / 169 , 577 / 408 and the convergent following p / q is p + 2 q / p + q .
The convergent p / q differs from       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   by almost exactly 1 / 2 √ 2 q 2 , which follows from:       |     2    −    p  q     |   =      |   2   q   2    −   p   2     |      q   2      (     2    +    p  q     )      =    1    q   2      (     2    +    p  q     )      ≈    1   2    2     q   2         {\displaystyle \left|{\sqrt {2}}-{\frac {p}{q}}\right|={\frac {|2q^{2}-p^{2}|}{q^{2}\!\left({\sqrt {2}}+{\frac {p}{q}}\right)}}={\frac {1}{q^{2}\!\left({\sqrt {2}}+{\frac {p}{q}}\right)}}\thickapprox {\frac {1}{2{\sqrt {2}}q^{2}}}}    Nested square   The following nested square expressions converge to       2      {\textstyle {\sqrt {2}}}   :             2       =     3  2     −  2    (      1  4     −    (      1  4     −    (       1  4     −  ⋯     )     2     )    2     )    2          =     3  2     −  4    (      1  8     +    (      1  8     +    (       1  8     +  ⋯     )     2     )    2     )    2    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\sqrt {2}}&={\tfrac {3}{2}}-2\left({\tfrac {1}{4}}-\left({\tfrac {1}{4}}-{\bigl (}{\tfrac {1}{4}}-\cdots {\bigr )}^{2}\right)^{2}\right)^{2}\\&={\tfrac {3}{2}}-4\left({\tfrac {1}{8}}+\left({\tfrac {1}{8}}+{\bigl (}{\tfrac {1}{8}}+\cdots {\bigr )}^{2}\right)^{2}\right)^{2}.\end{aligned}}}    Applications   Paper size   The A series of paper sizes  In 1786, German physics professor Georg Christoph Lichtenberg  found that any sheet of paper whose long edge is       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   times longer than its short edge could be folded in half and aligned with its shorter side to produce a sheet with exactly the same proportions as the original.
This ratio of lengths of the longer over the shorter side guarantees that cutting a sheet in half along a line results in the smaller sheets having the same (approximate) ratio as the original sheet.
When Germany standardised paper sizes at the beginning of the 20th century, they used Lichtenberg's ratio to create the "A" series of paper sizes.
Today, the (approximate) aspect ratio of paper sizes under ISO 216 (A4, A0, etc.)
is 1:       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   .
Proof: Let     S  =    {\displaystyle S=}   shorter length and     L  =    {\displaystyle L=}   longer length of the sides of a sheet of paper, with       R  =    L  S    =    2      {\displaystyle R={\frac {L}{S}}={\sqrt {2}}}   as required by ISO 216.
Let      R  ′   =     L  ′    S  ′       {\displaystyle R'={\frac {L'}{S'}}}   be the analogous ratio of the halved sheet, then        R  ′   =    S   L   /   2     =     2  S   L    =    2   (  L   /   S  )     =    2   2     =    2    =  R    {\displaystyle R'={\frac {S}{L/2}}={\frac {2S}{L}}={\frac {2}{(L/S)}}={\frac {2}{\sqrt {2}}}={\sqrt {2}}=R}   .
Physical sciences   There are some interesting properties involving the square root of 2 in the physical sciences :  The square root of two is the frequency ratio of a tritone interval in twelve-tone equal temperament music.
The square root of two forms the relationship of f-stops in photographic lenses, which in turn means that the ratio of areas between two successive apertures is 2.
The celestial latitude (declination) of the Sun during a planet's astronomical cross-quarter day points equals the tilt of the planet's axis divided by       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   .
Distances between vertices of a double unit cube are square roots of the first six natural numbers , including the square root of 2 (√7 is not possible due to Legendre's three-square theorem )  In the brain there are lattice cells, discovered in 2005 by a group led by May-Britt and Edvard Moser.
"The grid cells were found in the cortical area located right next to the hippocampus  At one end of this cortical area the mesh size is small and at the other it is very large.
However, the increase in mesh size is not left to chance, but increases by the squareroot of two from one area to the next."
Number that is not a ratio of integers  The number √ 2 is irrational.
In mathematics , the irrational numbers ( in- + rational ) are all the real numbers that are not rational numbers .
That is, irrational numbers cannot be expressed as the ratio of two integers .
When the ratio of lengths of two line segments is an irrational number, the line segments are also described as being incommensurable , meaning that they share no "measure" in common, that is, there is no length ("the measure"), no matter how short, that could be used to express the lengths of both of the two given segments as integer multiples of itself.
Among irrational numbers are the ratio π of a circle's circumference to its diameter, Euler's number e , the golden ratio φ , and the square root of two .
In fact, all square roots of natural numbers , other than of perfect squares , are irrational.
Like all real numbers, irrational numbers can be expressed in positional notation , notably as a decimal number.
In the case of irrational numbers, the decimal expansion does not terminate, nor end with a repeating sequence .
For example, the decimal representation of π starts with 3.14159, but no finite number of digits can represent π exactly, nor does it repeat.
Conversely, a decimal expansion that terminates or repeats must be a rational number.
These are provable properties of rational numbers and positional number systems and are not used as definitions in mathematics.
Irrational numbers can also be expressed as non-terminating continued fractions (which in some cases are periodic ), and in many other ways.
As a consequence of Cantor's proof that the real numbers are uncountable and the rationals countable, it follows that almost all real numbers are irrational.
History   Set of real numbers (R), which include the rationals (Q), which include the integers (Z), which include the natural numbers (N).
The real numbers also include the irrationals (R\Q).
Ancient Greece   The first proof of the existence of irrational numbers is usually attributed to a Pythagorean (possibly Hippasus of Metapontum ),  who probably discovered them while identifying sides of the pentagram .
The Pythagorean method would have claimed that there must be some sufficiently small, indivisible unit that could fit evenly into one of these lengths as well as the other.
Hippasus in the 5th century BC, however, was able to deduce that there was no common unit of measure, and that the assertion of such an existence was a contradiction.
He did this by demonstrating that if the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle was indeed commensurable with a leg, then one of those lengths measured in that unit of measure must be both odd and even, which is impossible.
His reasoning is as follows:  Start with an isosceles right triangle with side lengths of integers a , b , and c .
The ratio of the hypotenuse to a leg is represented by c : b .
Assume a , b , and c are in the smallest possible terms  ( i.e.
they have no common factors).
By the Pythagorean theorem : c 2 = a 2 + b 2 = b 2 + b 2 = 2 b 2 .
(Since the triangle is isosceles, a = b ).
Since c 2 = 2 b 2 , c 2 is divisible by 2, and therefore even.
Since c 2 is even, c must be even.
Since c is even, dividing c by 2 yields an integer.
Let y be this integer ( c = 2 y ).
Squaring both sides of c = 2 y yields c 2 = (2 y ) 2 , or c 2 = 4 y 2 .
Substituting 4 y 2 for c 2 in the first equation ( c 2 = 2 b 2 ) gives us 4 y 2 = 2 b 2 .
Dividing by 2 yields 2 y 2 = b 2 .
Since y is an integer, and 2 y 2 = b 2 , b 2 is divisible by 2, and therefore even.
Since b 2 is even, b must be even.
We have just shown that both b and c must be even.
Hence they have a common factor of 2.
However, this contradicts the assumption that they have no common factors.
This contradiction proves that c and b cannot both be integers and thus the existence of a number that cannot be expressed as a ratio of two integers.
Greek mathematicians termed this ratio of incommensurable magnitudes alogos , or inexpressible.
Hippasus, however, was not lauded for his efforts: according to one legend, he made his discovery while out at sea, and was subsequently thrown overboard by his fellow Pythagoreans 'for having produced an element in the universe which denied the...
doctrine that all phenomena in the universe can be reduced to whole numbers and their ratios.'
Another legend states that Hippasus was merely exiled for this revelation.
Whatever the consequence to Hippasus himself, his discovery posed a very serious problem to Pythagorean mathematics, since it shattered the assumption that numbers and geometry were inseparable; a foundation of their theory.
The discovery of incommensurable ratios was indicative of another problem facing the Greeks: the relation of the discrete to the continuous.
This was brought to light by Zeno of Elea , who questioned the conception that quantities are discrete and composed of a finite number of units of a given size.
Past Greek conceptions dictated that they necessarily must be, for "whole numbers represent discrete objects, and a commensurable ratio represents a relation between two collections of discrete objects",  but Zeno found that in fact " in general are not discrete collections of units; this is why ratios of incommensurable  appear...
.uantities are, in other words, continuous".
What this means is that contrary to the popular conception of the time, there cannot be an indivisible, smallest unit of measure for any quantity.
In fact, these divisions of quantity must necessarily be infinite .
For example, consider a line segment: this segment can be split in half, that half split in half, the half of the half in half, and so on.
This process can continue infinitely, for there is always another half to be split.
The more times the segment is halved, the closer the unit of measure comes to zero, but it never reaches exactly zero.
This is just what Zeno sought to prove.
He sought to prove this by formulating four paradoxes , which demonstrated the contradictions inherent in the mathematical thought of the time.
While Zeno's paradoxes accurately demonstrated the deficiencies of contemporary mathematical conceptions, they were not regarded as proof of the alternative.
In the minds of the Greeks, disproving the validity of one view did not necessarily prove the validity of another, and therefore, further investigation had to occur.
The next step was taken by Eudoxus of Cnidus , who formalized a new theory of proportion that took into account commensurable as well as incommensurable quantities.
Central to his idea was the distinction between magnitude and number.
A magnitude "...was not a number but stood for entities such as line segments, angles, areas, volumes, and time which could vary, as we would say, continuously.
Magnitudes were opposed to numbers, which jumped from one value to another, as from 4 to 5".
Numbers are composed of some smallest, indivisible unit, whereas magnitudes are infinitely reducible.
Because no quantitative values were assigned to magnitudes, Eudoxus was then able to account for both commensurable and incommensurable ratios by defining a ratio in terms of its magnitude, and proportion as an equality between two ratios.
By taking quantitative values (numbers) out of the equation, he avoided the trap of having to express an irrational number as a number.
"Eudoxus' theory enabled the Greek mathematicians to make tremendous progress in geometry by supplying the necessary logical foundation for incommensurable ratios".
This incommensurability is dealt with in Euclid's Elements, Book X, Proposition 9.
It was not until Eudoxus developed a theory of proportion that took into account irrational as well as rational ratios that a strong mathematical foundation of irrational numbers was created.
As a result of the distinction between number and magnitude, geometry became the only method that could take into account incommensurable ratios.
Because previous numerical foundations were still incompatible with the concept of incommensurability, Greek focus shifted away from numerical conceptions such as algebra and focused almost exclusively on geometry.
In fact, in many cases, algebraic conceptions were reformulated into geometric terms.
This may account for why we still conceive of x 2 and x 3 as x squared and x cubed instead of x to the second power and x to the third power.
Also crucial to Zeno's work with incommensurable magnitudes was the fundamental focus on deductive reasoning that resulted from the foundational shattering of earlier Greek mathematics.
The realization that some basic conception within the existing theory was at odds with reality necessitated a complete and thorough investigation of the axioms and assumptions that underlie that theory.
Out of this necessity, Eudoxus developed his method of exhaustion , a kind of reductio ad absurdum that "...established the deductive organization on the basis of explicit axioms..." as well as "...reinforced the earlier decision to rely on deductive reasoning for proof".
This method of exhaustion is the first step in the creation of calculus.
Theodorus of Cyrene proved the irrationality of the surds of whole numbers up to 17, but stopped there probably because the algebra he used could not be applied to the square root of 17.
India   Geometrical and mathematical problems involving irrational numbers such as square roots were addressed very early during the Vedic period in India.
There are references to such calculations in the Samhitas , Brahmanas , and the Shulba Sutras (800 BC or earlier).
It is suggested that the concept of irrationality was implicitly accepted by Indian mathematicians since the 7th century BC, when Manava (c.
750 – 690 BC) believed that the square roots of numbers such as 2 and 61 could not be exactly determined.
Historian Carl Benjamin Boyer , however, writes that "such claims are not well substantiated and unlikely to be true".
Later, in their treatises, Indian mathematicians wrote on the arithmetic of surds including addition, subtraction, multiplication, rationalization, as well as separation and extraction of square roots.
Mathematicians like Brahmagupta (in 628 AD) and Bhāskara I (in 629 AD) made contributions in this area as did other mathematicians who followed.
In the 12th century Bhāskara II evaluated some of these formulas and critiqued them, identifying their limitations.
During the 14th to 16th centuries, Madhava of Sangamagrama and the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics discovered the infinite series for several irrational numbers such as π and certain irrational values of trigonometric functions .
Jyeṣṭhadeva provided proofs for these infinite series in the Yuktibhāṣā .
Islamic World   In the Middle Ages , the development of algebra by Muslim mathematicians allowed irrational numbers to be treated as algebraic objects .
Middle Eastern mathematicians also merged the concepts of " number " and " magnitude " into a more general idea of real numbers , criticized Euclid's idea of ratios , developed the theory of composite ratios, and extended the concept of number to ratios of continuous magnitude.
In his commentary on Book 10 of the Elements , the Persian mathematician Al-Mahani (d.
874/884) examined and classified quadratic irrationals and cubic irrationals.
He provided definitions for rational and irrational magnitudes, which he treated as irrational numbers.
He dealt with them freely but explains them in geometric terms as follows:    "It will be a rational (magnitude) when we, for instance, say 10, 12, 3%, 6%, etc., because its value is pronounced and expressed quantitatively.
What is not rational is irrational and it is impossible to pronounce and represent its value quantitatively.
For example: the roots of numbers such as 10, 15, 20 which are not squares, the sides of numbers which are not cubes etc.
"
In contrast to Euclid's concept of magnitudes as lines, Al-Mahani considered integers and fractions as rational magnitudes, and square roots and cube roots as irrational magnitudes.
He also introduced an arithmetical approach to the concept of irrationality, as he attributes the following to irrational magnitudes:    "their sums or differences, or results of their addition to a rational magnitude, or results of subtracting a magnitude of this kind from an irrational one, or of a rational magnitude from it."
The Egyptian mathematician Abū Kāmil Shujā ibn Aslam (c.
850 – 930) was the first to accept irrational numbers as solutions to quadratic equations or as coefficients in an equation in the form of square roots and fourth roots .
In the 10th century, the Iraqi mathematician Al-Hashimi provided general proofs (rather than geometric demonstrations) for irrational numbers, as he considered multiplication, division, and other arithmetical functions.
Many of these concepts were eventually accepted by European mathematicians sometime after the Latin translations of the 12th century .
Al-Hassār , a Moroccan mathematician from Fez specializing in Islamic inheritance jurisprudence during the 12th century, first mentions the use of a fractional bar, where numerators and denominators are separated by a horizontal bar.
In his discussion he writes, "..., for example, if you are told to write three-fifths and a third of a fifth, write thus,        3   1    5   3       {\displaystyle {\frac {3\quad 1}{5\quad 3}}}   ."
This same fractional notation appears soon after in the work of Leonardo Fibonacci in the 13th century.
Modern period   The 17th century saw imaginary numbers become a powerful tool in the hands of Abraham de Moivre , and especially of Leonhard Euler .
The completion of the theory of complex numbers in the 19th century entailed the differentiation of irrationals into algebraic and transcendental numbers , the proof of the existence of transcendental numbers, and the resurgence of the scientific study of the theory of irrationals, largely ignored since Euclid .
The year 1872 saw the publication of the theories of Karl Weierstrass (by his pupil Ernst Kossak), Eduard Heine ( Crelle's Journal , 74), Georg Cantor (Annalen, 5), and Richard Dedekind .
Méray had taken in 1869 the same point of departure as Heine, but the theory is generally referred to the year 1872.
Weierstrass's method has been completely set forth by Salvatore Pincherle in 1880,  and Dedekind's has received additional prominence through the author's later work (1888) and the endorsement by Paul Tannery (1894).
Weierstrass, Cantor, and Heine base their theories on infinite series, while Dedekind founds his on the idea of a cut (Schnitt) in the system of all rational numbers , separating them into two groups having certain characteristic properties.
The subject has received later contributions at the hands of Weierstrass, Leopold Kronecker (Crelle, 101), and Charles Méray .
Continued fractions , closely related to irrational numbers (and due to Cataldi, 1613), received attention at the hands of Euler, and at the opening of the 19th century were brought into prominence through the writings of Joseph-Louis Lagrange .
Dirichlet also added to the general theory, as have numerous contributors to the applications of the subject.
Johann Heinrich Lambert proved (1761) that π cannot be rational, and that e n is irrational if n is rational (unless n = 0).
While Lambert's proof is often called incomplete, modern assessments support it as satisfactory, and in fact for its time it is unusually rigorous.
Adrien-Marie Legendre (1794), after introducing the Bessel–Clifford function , provided a proof to show that π 2 is irrational,  whence it follows immediately that π is irrational also.
The existence of transcendental numbers was first established by Liouville (1844, 1851).
Later, Georg Cantor (1873) proved their existence by a different method , which showed that every interval in the reals contains transcendental numbers.
Charles Hermite (1873) first proved e transcendental, and Ferdinand von Lindemann (1882), starting from Hermite's conclusions, showed the same for π.
Lindemann's proof was much simplified by Weierstrass (1885), still further by David Hilbert (1893), and was finally made elementary by Adolf Hurwitz  and Paul Gordan .
Examples   This article needs additional citations for verification .
Find sources:  "Irrational number" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Square roots   The square root of 2 was likely the first number proved irrational.
The golden ratio is another famous quadratic irrational number.
The square roots of all natural numbers that are not perfect squares are irrational and a proof may be found in quadratic irrationals .
General roots   The proof above  for the square root of two can be generalized using the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
This asserts that every integer has a unique factorization into primes.
Using it we can show that if a rational number is not an integer then no integral power of it can be an integer, as in lowest terms there must be a prime in the denominator that does not divide into the numerator whatever power each is raised to.
Therefore, if an integer is not an exact k th power of another integer, then that first integer's k th root is irrational.
Logarithms   Perhaps the numbers most easy to prove irrational are certain logarithms .
Here is a proof by contradiction that log 2 3 is irrational (log 2 3 ≈ 1.58 > 0).
Assume log 2 3 is rational.
For some positive integers m and n , we have       log   2    ⁡  3  =    m  n    .
{\displaystyle \log _{2}3={\frac {m}{n}}.}
It follows that       2   m   /   n    =  3    {\displaystyle 2^{m/n}=3}        (   2   m   /   n     )   n    =   3   n      {\displaystyle (2^{m/n})^{n}=3^{n}}         2   m    =   3   n    .
{\displaystyle 2^{m}=3^{n}.}
The number 2 raised to any positive integer power must be even (because it is divisible by 2) and the number 3 raised to any positive integer power must be odd (since none of its prime factors will be 2).
Clearly, an integer cannot be both odd and even at the same time: we have a contradiction.
The only assumption we made was that log 2 3 is rational (and so expressible as a quotient of integers m / n with n ≠ 0).
The contradiction means that this assumption must be false, i.e.
log 2 3 is irrational, and can never be expressed as a quotient of integers m / n with n ≠ 0.
Cases such as log 10 2 can be treated similarly.
Types   An irrational number may be algebraic , that is a real root of a polynomial with integer coefficients.
Those that are not algebraic are transcendental .
Algebraic   The real algebraic numbers are the real solutions of polynomial equations      p  (  x  )  =   a   n     x   n    +   a   n  −  1     x   n  −  1    +  ⋯  +   a   1    x  +   a   0    =  0   ,    {\displaystyle p(x)=a_{n}x^{n}+a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\cdots +a_{1}x+a_{0}=0\;,}    where the coefficients      a   i      {\displaystyle a_{i}}   are integers and      a   n    ≠  0    {\displaystyle a_{n}\neq 0}   .
An example of an irrational algebraic number is x 0 = (2 1/2 + 1) 1/3 .
It is clearly algebraic since it is the root of an integer polynomial, ( x 3 − 1) 2 = 2, which is equivalent to x 6 − 2 x 3 − 1 = 0.
This polynomial has no rational roots, since the rational root theorem shows that the only possibilities are ±1, but x 0 is greater than 1.
So x 0 is an irrational algebraic number.
There are countably many algebraic numbers, since there are countably many integer polynomials.
Transcendental   So almost all irrational numbers are transcendental .
Examples are e  r and π  r , which are transcendental for all nonzero rational r.
 Because the algebraic numbers form a subfield of the real numbers, many irrational real numbers can be constructed by combining transcendental and algebraic numbers.
For example, 3 π + 2, π + √ 2 and e √ 3 are irrational (and even transcendental).
Decimal expansions   The decimal expansion of an irrational number never repeats (meaning the decimal expansion does not repeat the same number or sequence of numbers) or terminates (this means there is not a finite number of nonzero digits), unlike any rational number.
The same is true for binary , octal or hexadecimal expansions, and in general for expansions in every positional  notation with natural bases.
To show this, suppose we divide integers n by m (where m is nonzero).
When long division is applied to the division of n by m , there can never be a remainder greater than or equal to m .
If 0 appears as a remainder, the decimal expansion terminates.
If 0 never occurs, then the algorithm can run at most m − 1 steps without using any remainder more than once.
After that, a remainder must recur, and then the decimal expansion repeats.
Conversely, suppose we are faced with a repeating decimal , we can prove that it is a fraction of two integers.
For example, consider:      A  =  0.7   162   162   162   …    {\displaystyle A=0.7\,162\,162\,162\,\ldots }    Here the repetend is 162 and the length of the repetend is 3.
First, we multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to move the decimal point to the right so that it is just in front of a repetend.
In this example we would multiply by 10 to obtain:      10  A  =  7.162   162   162   …    {\displaystyle 10A=7.162\,162\,162\,\ldots }    Now we multiply this equation by 10 r where r is the length of the repetend.
This has the effect of moving the decimal point to be in front of the "next" repetend.
In our example, multiply by 10 3 :      10  ,  000  A  =  7   162.162   162   …    {\displaystyle 10,000A=7\,162.162\,162\,\ldots }    The result of the two multiplications gives two different expressions with exactly the same "decimal portion", that is, the tail end of 10,000 A matches the tail end of 10 A exactly.
Here, both 10,000 A and 10 A have .162 162 162 ...
after the decimal point.
Therefore, when we subtract the 10 A equation from the 10,000 A equation, the tail end of 10 A cancels out the tail end of 10,000 A leaving us with:      9990  A  =  7155.
{\displaystyle 9990A=7155.}
Then      A  =    7155  9990    =    53  74      {\displaystyle A={\frac {7155}{9990}}={\frac {53}{74}}}    is a ratio of integers and therefore a rational number.
Irrational powers   Dov Jarden gave a simple non- constructive proof that there exist two irrational numbers a and b , such that a b is rational:     Consider √ 2 √ 2 ; if this is rational, then take a = b = √ 2 .
Otherwise, take a to be the irrational number √ 2 √ 2 and b = √ 2 .
Then a b = ( √ 2 √ 2 ) √ 2 = √ 2 √ 2 · √ 2 = √ 2 2 = 2, which is rational.
Although the above argument does not decide between the two cases, the Gelfond–Schneider theorem shows that √ 2 √ 2 is transcendental , hence irrational.
This theorem states that if a and b are both algebraic numbers , and a is not equal to 0 or 1, and b is not a rational number, then any value of a b is a transcendental number (there can be more than one value if complex number exponentiation is used).
An example that provides a simple constructive proof is          (    2    )     log    2     ⁡  3    =  3.
{\displaystyle \left({\sqrt {2}}\right)^{\log _{\sqrt {2}}3}=3.}
The base of the left side is irrational and the right side is rational, so one must prove that the exponent on the left side,      log    2     ⁡  3    {\displaystyle \log _{\sqrt {2}}3}   , is irrational.
This is so because, by the formula relating logarithms with different bases,       log    2     ⁡  3  =      log   2    ⁡  3     log   2    ⁡    2       =      log   2    ⁡  3    1   /   2     =  2   log   2    ⁡  3    {\displaystyle \log _{\sqrt {2}}3={\frac {\log _{2}3}{\log _{2}{\sqrt {2}}}}={\frac {\log _{2}3}{1/2}}=2\log _{2}3}    which we can assume, for the sake of establishing a contradiction , equals a ratio m/n of positive integers.
Then      log   2    ⁡  3  =  m   /   2  n    {\displaystyle \log _{2}3=m/2n}   hence      2    log   2    ⁡  3    =   2   m   /   2  n      {\displaystyle 2^{\log _{2}3}=2^{m/2n}}   hence     3  =   2   m   /   2  n      {\displaystyle 3=2^{m/2n}}   hence      3   2  n    =   2   m      {\displaystyle 3^{2n}=2^{m}}   , which is a contradictory pair of prime factorizations and hence violates the fundamental theorem of arithmetic (unique prime factorization).
A stronger result is the following:  Every rational number in the interval     (  (  1   /   e   )   1   /   e    ,  ∞  )    {\displaystyle ((1/e)^{1/e},\infty )}   can be written either as a a for some irrational number a or as n n for some natural number n .
Similarly,  every positive rational number can be written either as      a    a   a        {\displaystyle a^{a^{a}}}   for some irrational number a or as      n    n   n        {\displaystyle n^{n^{n}}}   for some natural number n .
Open questions   It is not known if     π  +  e    {\displaystyle \pi +e}   (or     π  −  e    {\displaystyle \pi -e}   ) is irrational.
In fact, there is no pair of non-zero integers     m  ,  n    {\displaystyle m,n}   for which it is known whether     m  π  +  n  e    {\displaystyle m\pi +ne}   is irrational.
Moreover, it is not known if the set     {  π  ,  e  }    {\displaystyle \{\pi ,e\}}   is algebraically independent over      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   .
It is not known if     π  e  ,    π   /   e  ,     π   e    ,     π    2     ,    ln  ⁡  π  ,    {\displaystyle \pi e,\ \pi /e,\ \pi ^{e},\ \pi ^{\sqrt {2}},\ \ln \pi ,}    Catalan's constant , or the Euler–Mascheroni constant      γ    {\displaystyle \gamma }   are irrational.
It is not known if either of the tetrations         n    π    {\displaystyle ^{n}\pi }   or        n    e    {\displaystyle ^{n}e}   is rational for some integer     n  >  1.
{\displaystyle n>1.}
In constructive mathematics   In constructive mathematics , excluded middle is not valid, so it is not true that every real number is rational or irrational.
Thus, the notion of an irrational number bifurcates into multiple distinct notions.
One could take the traditional definition of an irrational number as a real number that is not rational.
However, there is a second definition of an irrational number used in constructive mathematics, that a real number     r    {\displaystyle r}   is an irrational number if it is apart from every rational number, or equivalently, if the distance     |  r  −  q  |    {\displaystyle \vert r-q\vert }   between     r    {\displaystyle r}   and every rational number     q    {\displaystyle q}   is positive.
This definition is stronger than the traditional definition of an irrational number.
This second definition is used in Errett Bishop 's proof that the square root of 2 is irrational .
Set of all irrationals   Since the reals form an uncountable set, of which the rationals are a countable subset, the complementary set of
irrationals is uncountable.
Under the usual ( Euclidean ) distance function     d  (  x  ,  y  )  =  |  x  −  y  |    {\displaystyle d(x,y)=\vert x-y\vert }   , the real numbers are a metric space and hence also a topological space .
Restricting the Euclidean distance function gives the irrationals the structure of a metric space.
Since the subspace of irrationals is not closed,
the induced metric is not complete .
Being a G-delta set —i.e., a countable intersection of open subsets—in a complete metric space, the space of irrationals is completely metrizable : that is, there is a metric on the irrationals inducing the same topology as the restriction of the Euclidean metric, but with respect to which the irrationals are complete.
One can see this without knowing the aforementioned fact about G-delta sets: the continued fraction expansion of an irrational number defines a homeomorphism from the space of irrationals to the space of all sequences of positive integers, which is easily seen to be completely metrizable.
Furthermore, the set of all irrationals is a disconnected metrizable space.
In fact, the irrationals equipped with the subspace topology have a basis of clopen groups so the space is zero-dimensional .
Number divisible only by 1 or itself  "Prime" redirects here.
For other uses, see Prime (disambiguation) .
Composite numbers can be arranged into rectangles but prime numbers cannot.
A prime number (or a prime ) is a natural number greater than 1 that is not a product of two smaller natural numbers.
A natural number greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number .
For example, 5 is prime because the only ways of writing it as a product, 1 × 5 or 5 × 1 , involve 5 itself.
However, 4 is composite because it is a product (2 × 2) in which both numbers are smaller than 4.
Primes are central in number theory because of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic : every natural number greater than 1 is either a prime itself or can be factorized as a product of primes that is unique up to their order.
The property of being prime is called primality .
A simple but slow method of checking the primality of a given number     n    {\displaystyle n}   , called trial division , tests whether     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a multiple of any integer between 2 and       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   .
Faster algorithms include the Miller–Rabin primality test , which is fast but has a small chance of error, and the AKS primality test , which always produces the correct answer in polynomial time but is too slow to be practical.
Particularly fast methods are available for numbers of special forms, such as Mersenne numbers .
As of December 2018  the largest known prime number is a Mersenne prime with 24,862,048 decimal digits .
There are infinitely many primes, as demonstrated by Euclid around 300 BC.
No known simple formula separates prime numbers from composite numbers.
However, the distribution of primes within the natural numbers in the large can be statistically modelled.
The first result in that direction is the prime number theorem , proven at the end of the 19th century, which says that the probability of a randomly chosen large number being prime is inversely proportional to its number of digits, that is, to its logarithm .
Several historical questions regarding prime numbers are still unsolved.
These include Goldbach's conjecture , that every even integer greater than 2 can be expressed as the sum of two primes, and the twin prime conjecture, that there are infinitely many pairs of primes that differ by two.
Such questions spurred the development of various branches of number theory, focusing on analytic or algebraic aspects of numbers.
Primes are used in several routines in information technology , such as public-key cryptography , which relies on the difficulty of factoring large numbers into their prime factors.
In abstract algebra , objects that behave in a generalized way like prime numbers include prime elements and prime ideals .
Definition and examples Main article: List of prime numbers A natural number (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.)
is called a prime number (or a prime ) if it is greater than 1 and cannot be written as the product of two smaller natural numbers.
The numbers greater than 1 that are not prime are called composite numbers .
In other words,     n    {\displaystyle n}   is prime if     n    {\displaystyle n}   items cannot be divided up into smaller equal-size groups of more than one item,  or if it is not possible to arrange     n    {\displaystyle n}   dots into a rectangular grid that is more than one dot wide and more than one dot high.
For example, among the numbers 1 through 6, the numbers 2, 3, and 5 are the prime numbers,  as there are no other numbers that divide them evenly (without a remainder).
1 is not prime, as it is specifically excluded in the definition.
4 = 2 × 2 and 6 = 2 × 3 are both composite.
Demonstration, with Cuisenaire rods , that 7 is prime, because none of 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 divide it evenly The divisors of a natural number     n    {\displaystyle n}   are the natural numbers that divide     n    {\displaystyle n}   evenly.
Every natural number has both 1 and itself as a divisor.
If it has any other divisor, it cannot be prime.
This leads to an equivalent definition of prime numbers: they are the numbers with exactly two positive divisors .
Those two are 1 and the number itself.
As 1 has only one divisor, itself, it is not prime by this definition.
Yet another way to express the same thing is that a number     n    {\displaystyle n}   is prime if it is greater than one and if none of the numbers     2  ,  3  ,  …  ,  n  −  1    {\displaystyle 2,3,\dots ,n-1}   divides     n    {\displaystyle n}   evenly.
The first 25 prime numbers (all the prime numbers less than 100) are:   2 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 11 , 13 , 17 , 19 , 23 , 29 , 31 , 37 , 41 , 43 , 47 , 53 , 59 , 61 , 67 , 71 , 73 , 79 , 83 , 89 , 97 (sequence A000040 in the OEIS ).
No even number      n    {\displaystyle n}   greater than 2 is prime because any such number can be expressed as the product     2  ×  n   /   2    {\displaystyle 2\times n/2}   .
Therefore, every prime number other than 2 is an odd number , and is called an odd prime .
Similarly, when written in the usual decimal system, all prime numbers larger than 5 end in 1, 3, 7, or 9.
The numbers that end with other digits are all composite: decimal numbers that end in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 are even, and decimal numbers that end in 0 or 5 are divisible by 5.
The set of all primes is sometimes denoted by      P     {\displaystyle \mathbf {P} }   (a boldface capital P )  or by      P     {\displaystyle \mathbb {P} }   (a blackboard bold capital P).
History The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus , from around 1550 BC, has Egyptian fraction expansions of different forms for prime and composite numbers.
However, the earliest surviving records of the study of prime numbers come from the ancient Greek mathematians , who called them prōtos arithmòs ( πρῶτος ἀριθμὸς ).
Euclid 's Elements (c.
300 BC) proves the infinitude of primes and the fundamental theorem of arithmetic , and shows how to construct a perfect number from a Mersenne prime .
Another Greek invention, the Sieve of Eratosthenes , is still used to construct lists of primes.
Around 1000 AD, the Islamic mathematician Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) found Wilson's theorem , characterizing the prime numbers as the numbers     n    {\displaystyle n}   that evenly divide     (  n  −  1  )  !
+  1    {\displaystyle (n-1)!+1}   .
He also conjectured that all even perfect numbers come from Euclid's construction using Mersenne primes, but was unable to prove it.
Another Islamic mathematician, Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi , observed that the sieve of Eratosthenes can be sped up by considering only the prime divisors up to the square root of the upper limit.
Fibonacci took the innovations from Islamic mathematics to Europe.
His book Liber Abaci (1202) was the first to describe trial division for testing primality, again using divisors only up to the square root.
In 1640 Pierre de Fermat stated (without proof) Fermat's little theorem (later proved by Leibniz and Euler ).
Fermat also investigated the primality of the Fermat numbers       2    2   n      +  1    {\displaystyle 2^{2^{n}}+1}   ,  and Marin Mersenne studied the Mersenne primes , prime numbers of the form      2   p    −  1    {\displaystyle 2^{p}-1}   with     p    {\displaystyle p}   itself a prime.
Christian Goldbach formulated Goldbach's conjecture , that every even number is the sum of two primes, in a 1742 letter to Euler.
Euler proved Alhazen's conjecture (now the Euclid–Euler theorem ) that all even perfect numbers can be constructed from Mersenne primes.
He introduced methods from mathematical analysis to this area in his proofs of the infinitude of the primes and the divergence of the sum of the reciprocals of the primes         1  2     +     1  3     +     1  5     +     1  7     +     1  11     +  ⋯    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}+{\tfrac {1}{3}}+{\tfrac {1}{5}}+{\tfrac {1}{7}}+{\tfrac {1}{11}}+\cdots }   .
At the start of the 19th century, Legendre and Gauss conjectured that as     x    {\displaystyle x}   tends to infinity, the number of primes up to     x    {\displaystyle x}   is asymptotic to     x   /   log  ⁡  x    {\displaystyle x/\log x}   , where     log  ⁡  x    {\displaystyle \log x}   is the natural logarithm of     x    {\displaystyle x}   .
A weaker consequence of this high density of primes was Bertrand's postulate , that for every     n  >  1    {\displaystyle n>1}   there is a prime between     n    {\displaystyle n}   and     2  n    {\displaystyle 2n}   , proved in 1852 by Pafnuty Chebyshev .
Ideas of Bernhard Riemann in his 1859 paper on the zeta-function sketched an outline for proving the conjecture of Legendre and Gauss.
Although the closely related Riemann hypothesis remains unproven, Riemann's outline was completed in 1896 by Hadamard and de la Vallée Poussin , and the result is now known as the prime number theorem .
Another important 19th century result was Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions , that certain arithmetic progressions contain infinitely many primes.
Many mathematicians have worked on primality tests for numbers larger than those where trial division is practicably applicable.
Methods that are restricted to specific number forms include Pépin's test for Fermat numbers (1877),   Proth's theorem (c.
1878),  the Lucas–Lehmer primality test (originated 1856), and the generalized Lucas primality test .
Since 1951 all the largest known primes have been found using these tests on computers .
The search for ever larger primes has generated interest outside mathematical circles, through the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search and other distributed computing projects.
The idea that prime numbers had few applications outside of pure mathematics  was shattered in the 1970s when public-key cryptography and the RSA cryptosystem were invented, using prime numbers as their basis.
The increased practical importance of computerized primality testing and factorization led to the development of improved methods capable of handling large numbers of unrestricted form.
The mathematical theory of prime numbers also moved forward with the Green–Tao theorem (2004) that there are arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions of prime numbers, and Yitang Zhang 's 2013 proof that there exist infinitely many prime gaps of bounded size.
Primality of one Most early Greeks did not even consider 1 to be a number,   so they could not consider its primality.
A few scholars in the Greek and later Roman tradition, including Nicomachus , Iamblichus , Boethius , and Cassiodorus , also considered the prime numbers to be a subdivision of the odd numbers, so they did not consider 2 to be prime either.
However, Euclid and a majority of the other Greek mathematicians considered 2 as prime.
The medieval Islamic mathematicians largely followed the Greeks in viewing 1 as not being a number.
By the Middle Ages and Renaissance, mathematicians began treating 1 as a number, and some of them included it as the first prime number.
In the mid-18th century Christian Goldbach listed 1 as prime in his correspondence with Leonhard Euler ; however, Euler himself did not consider 1 to be prime.
In the 19th century many mathematicians still considered 1 to be prime,  and lists of primes that included 1 continued to be published as recently as 1956.
If the definition of a prime number were changed to call 1 a prime, many statements involving prime numbers would need to be reworded in a more awkward way.
For example, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic would need to be rephrased in terms of factorizations into primes greater than 1, because every number would have multiple factorizations with any number of copies of 1.
Similarly, the sieve of Eratosthenes would not work correctly if it handled 1 as a prime, because it would eliminate all multiples of 1 (that is, all other numbers) and output only the single number 1.
Some other more technical properties of prime numbers also do not hold for the number 1: for instance, the formulas for Euler's totient function or for the sum of divisors function are different for prime numbers than they are for 1.
By the early 20th century, mathematicians began to agree that 1 should not be listed as prime, but rather in its own special category as a " unit ".
Elementary properties Unique factorization Main article: Fundamental theorem of arithmetic Writing a number as a product of prime numbers is called a prime factorization of the number.
For example:         34866     =  2  ×  3  ×  3  ×  13  ×  149        =  2  ×   3   2    ×  13  ×  149.
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}34866&=2\times 3\times 3\times 13\times 149\\&=2\times 3^{2}\times 13\times 149.\end{aligned}}}   The terms in the product are called prime factors .
The same prime factor may occur more than once; this example has two copies of the prime factor     3.
{\displaystyle 3.}
When a prime occurs multiple times, exponentiation can be used to group together multiple copies of the same prime number: for example, in the second way of writing the product above,      3   2      {\displaystyle 3^{2}}   denotes the square or second power of     3.
The central importance of prime numbers to number theory and mathematics in general stems from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
This theorem states that every integer larger than 1 can be written as a product of one or more primes.
More strongly, this product is unique in the sense that any two prime factorizations of the same number will have the same numbers of copies of the same primes, although their ordering may differ.
So, although there are many different ways of finding a factorization using an integer factorization algorithm, they all must produce the same result.
Primes can thus be considered the "basic building blocks" of the natural numbers.
Some proofs of the uniqueness of prime factorizations are based on Euclid's lemma : If     p    {\displaystyle p}   is a prime number and     p    {\displaystyle p}   divides a product     a  b    {\displaystyle ab}   of integers     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b  ,    {\displaystyle b,}   then     p    {\displaystyle p}   divides     a    {\displaystyle a}   or     p    {\displaystyle p}   divides     b    {\displaystyle b}   (or both).
Conversely, if a number     p    {\displaystyle p}   has the property that when it divides a product it always divides at least one factor of the product, then     p    {\displaystyle p}   must be prime.
Infinitude Main article: Euclid's theorem There are infinitely many prime numbers.
Another way of saying this is that the sequence 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, ...
of prime numbers never ends.
This statement is referred to as Euclid's theorem in honor of the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid , since the first known proof for this statement is attributed to him.
Many more proofs of the infinitude of primes are known, including an analytical proof by Euler , Goldbach's  proof based on Fermat numbers ,   Furstenberg's  proof using general topology ,  and Kummer's elegant proof.
Euclid's proof  shows that every finite list of primes is incomplete.
The key idea is to multiply together the primes in any given list and add     1.
{\displaystyle 1.}
If the list consists of the primes      p   1    ,   p   2    ,  …  ,   p   n    ,    {\displaystyle p_{1},p_{2},\ldots ,p_{n},}   this gives the number     N  =  1  +   p   1    ⋅   p   2    ⋯   p   n    .
{\displaystyle N=1+p_{1}\cdot p_{2}\cdots p_{n}.}
By the fundamental theorem,     N    {\displaystyle N}   has a prime factorization     N  =   p   1   ′   ⋅   p   2   ′   ⋯   p   m   ′     {\displaystyle N=p'_{1}\cdot p'_{2}\cdots p'_{m}}   with one or more prime factors.
N    {\displaystyle N}   is evenly divisible by each of these factors, but     N    {\displaystyle N}   has a remainder of one when divided by any of the prime numbers in the given list, so none of the prime factors of     N    {\displaystyle N}   can be in the given list.
Because there is no finite list of all the primes, there must be infinitely many primes.
The numbers formed by adding one to the products of the smallest primes are called Euclid numbers .
The first five of them are prime, but the sixth,     1  +    (    2  ⋅  3  ⋅  5  ⋅  7  ⋅  11  ⋅  13    )    =  30031  =  59  ⋅  509  ,    {\displaystyle 1+{\big (}2\cdot 3\cdot 5\cdot 7\cdot 11\cdot 13{\big )}=30031=59\cdot 509,}   is a composite number.
Formulas for primes Main article: Formula for primes There is no known efficient formula for primes.
For example, there is no non-constant polynomial , even in several variables, that takes only prime values.
However, there are numerous expressions that do encode all primes, or only primes.
One possible formula is based on Wilson's theorem and generates the number 2 many times and all other primes exactly once.
There is also a set of Diophantine equations in nine variables and one parameter with the following property: the parameter is prime if and only if the resulting system of equations has a solution over the natural numbers.
This can be used to obtain a single formula with the property that all its positive values are prime.
Other examples of prime-generating formulas come from Mills' theorem and a theorem of Wright .
These assert that there are real constants     A  >  1    {\displaystyle A>1}   and     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   such that      ⌊   A    3   n      ⌋    and    ⌊   2    ⋯    2    2   μ          ⌋     {\displaystyle \left\lfloor A^{3^{n}}\right\rfloor {\text{ and }}\left\lfloor 2^{\cdots ^{2^{2^{\mu }}}}\right\rfloor }   are prime for any natural number     n    {\displaystyle n}   in the first formula, and any number of exponents in the second formula.
Here     ⌊    ⋅    ⌋    {\displaystyle \lfloor {}\cdot {}\rfloor }   represents the floor function , the largest integer less than or equal to the number in question.
However, these are not useful for generating primes, as the primes must be generated first in order to compute the values of     A    {\displaystyle A}   or     μ  .
{\displaystyle \mu .}
Open questions Further information: Category:Conjectures about prime numbers Many conjectures revolving about primes have been posed.
Often having an elementary formulation, many of these conjectures have withstood proof for decades: all four of Landau's problems from 1912 are still unsolved.
One of them is Goldbach's conjecture , which asserts that every even integer     n    {\displaystyle n}   greater than 2 can be written as a sum of two primes.
As of 2014  , this conjecture has been verified for all numbers up to     n  =  4  ⋅   10   18    .
{\displaystyle n=4\cdot 10^{18}.}
Weaker statements than this have been proven, for example, Vinogradov's theorem says that every sufficiently large odd integer can be written as a sum of three primes.
Chen's theorem says that every sufficiently large even number can be expressed as the sum of a prime and a semiprime (the product of two primes).
Also, any even integer greater than 10 can be written as the sum of six primes.
The branch of number theory studying such questions is called additive number theory .
Another type of problem concerns prime gaps , the differences between consecutive primes.
The existence of arbitrarily large prime gaps can be seen by noting that the sequence     n  !
+  2  ,  n  !
+  3  ,  …  ,  n  !
+  n    {\displaystyle n!+2,n!+3,\dots ,n!+n}   consists of     n  −  1    {\displaystyle n-1}   composite numbers, for any natural number     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}    However, large prime gaps occur much earlier than this argument shows.
For example, the first prime gap of length 8 is between the primes 89 and 97,  much smaller than     8  !
=  40320.
{\displaystyle 8!=40320.}
It is conjectured that there are infinitely many twin primes , pairs of primes with difference 2; this is the twin prime conjecture .
Polignac's conjecture states more generally that for every positive integer     k  ,    {\displaystyle k,}   there are infinitely many pairs of consecutive primes that differ by     2  k  .
{\displaystyle 2k.}
Andrica's conjecture ,   Brocard's conjecture ,   Legendre's conjecture ,  and Oppermann's conjecture  all suggest that the largest gaps between primes from     1    {\displaystyle 1}   to     n    {\displaystyle n}   should be at most approximately       n    ,    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}},}   a result that is known to follow from the Riemann hypothesis, while the much stronger Cramér conjecture sets the largest gap size at     O  (  (  log  ⁡  n   )   2    )  .
{\displaystyle O((\log n)^{2}).}
Prime gaps can be generalized to prime     k    {\displaystyle k}   -tuples , patterns in the differences among more than two prime numbers.
Their infinitude and density are the subject of the first Hardy–Littlewood conjecture , which can be motivated by the heuristic that the prime numbers behave similarly to a random sequence of numbers with density given by the prime number theorem.
Analytic properties Analytic number theory studies number theory through the lens of continuous functions , limits , infinite series , and the related mathematics of the infinite and infinitesimal .
This area of study began with Leonhard Euler and his first major result, the solution to the Basel problem .
The problem asked for the value of the infinite sum     1  +     1  4     +     1  9     +     1  16     +  …  ,    {\displaystyle 1+{\tfrac {1}{4}}+{\tfrac {1}{9}}+{\tfrac {1}{16}}+\dots ,}   which today can be recognized as the value     ζ  (  2  )    {\displaystyle \zeta (2)}   of the Riemann zeta function .
This function is closely connected to the prime numbers and to one of the most significant unsolved problems in mathematics, the Riemann hypothesis .
Euler showed that     ζ  (  2  )  =   π   2     /   6    {\displaystyle \zeta (2)=\pi ^{2}/6}   .
The reciprocal of this number,     6   /    π   2      {\displaystyle 6/\pi ^{2}}   , is the limiting probability that two random numbers selected uniformly from a large range are relatively prime (have no factors in common).
The distribution of primes in the large, such as the question how many primes are smaller than a given, large threshold, is described by the prime number theorem , but no efficient formula for the     n    {\displaystyle n}   -th prime is known.
Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions , in its basic form, asserts that linear polynomials     p  (  n  )  =  a  +  b  n    {\displaystyle p(n)=a+bn}   with relatively prime integers     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   take infinitely many prime values.
Stronger forms of the theorem state that the sum of the reciprocals of these prime values diverges, and that different linear polynomials with the same     b    {\displaystyle b}   have approximately the same proportions of primes.
Although conjectures have been formulated about the proportions of primes in higher-degree polynomials, they remain unproven, and it is unknown whether there exists a quadratic polynomial that (for integer arguments) is prime infinitely often.
Analytical proof of Euclid's theorem Euler's proof that there are infinitely many primes considers the sums of reciprocals of primes,       1  2    +    1  3    +    1  5    +    1  7    +  ⋯  +    1  p    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {1}{3}}+{\frac {1}{5}}+{\frac {1}{7}}+\cdots +{\frac {1}{p}}.}
Euler showed that, for any arbitrary real number      x    {\displaystyle x}   , there exists a prime     p    {\displaystyle p}   for which this sum is bigger than     x    {\displaystyle x}   .
This shows that there are infinitely many primes, because if there were finitely many primes the sum would reach its maximum value at the biggest prime rather than growing past every     x    {\displaystyle x}   .
The growth rate of this sum is described more precisely by Mertens' second theorem .
For comparison, the sum       1   1   2      +    1   2   2      +    1   3   2      +  ⋯  +    1   n   2        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{1^{2}}}+{\frac {1}{2^{2}}}+{\frac {1}{3^{2}}}+\cdots +{\frac {1}{n^{2}}}}   does not grow to infinity as     n    {\displaystyle n}   goes to infinity (see the Basel problem ).
In this sense, prime numbers occur more often than squares of natural numbers,
although both sets are infinite.
Brun's theorem states that the sum of the reciprocals of twin primes ,      (     1  3    +    1  5     )   +   (     1  5    +    1  7     )   +   (     1  11    +    1  13     )   +  ⋯  ,    {\displaystyle \left({{\frac {1}{3}}+{\frac {1}{5}}}\right)+\left({{\frac {1}{5}}+{\frac {1}{7}}}\right)+\left({{\frac {1}{11}}+{\frac {1}{13}}}\right)+\cdots ,}   is finite.
Because of Brun's theorem, it is not possible to use Euler's method to solve the twin prime conjecture , that there exist infinitely many twin primes.
Number of primes below a given bound Main articles: Prime number theorem and Prime-counting function The relative error of        n   log  ⁡  n        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {n}{\log n}}}   and the logarithmic integral     Li  ⁡  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \operatorname {Li} (n)}   as approximations to the prime-counting function .
Both relative errors decrease to zero as     n    {\displaystyle n}   grows, but the convergence to zero is much more rapid for the logarithmic integral.
The prime-counting function      π  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \pi (n)}   is defined as the number of primes not greater than     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
For example,     π  (  11  )  =  5    {\displaystyle \pi (11)=5}   , since there are five primes less than or equal to 11.
Methods such as the Meissel–Lehmer algorithm can compute exact values of     π  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \pi (n)}   faster than it would be possible to list each prime up to     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
The prime number theorem states that     π  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \pi (n)}   is asymptotic to     n   /   log  ⁡  n    {\displaystyle n/\log n}   , which is denoted as     π  (  n  )  ∼    n   log  ⁡  n     ,    {\displaystyle \pi (n)\sim {\frac {n}{\log n}},}   and means that the ratio of     π  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \pi (n)}   to the right-hand fraction approaches 1 as     n    {\displaystyle n}   grows to infinity.
This implies that the likelihood that a randomly chosen number less than     n    {\displaystyle n}   is prime is (approximately) inversely proportional to the number of digits in     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
It also implies that the     n    {\displaystyle n}   th prime number is proportional to     n  log  ⁡  n    {\displaystyle n\log n}    and therefore that the average size of a prime gap is proportional to     log  ⁡  n    {\displaystyle \log n}   .
A more accurate estimate for     π  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \pi (n)}   is given by the offset logarithmic integral       π  (  n  )  ∼  Li  ⁡  (  n  )  =   ∫   2    n       d  t    log  ⁡  t     .
{\displaystyle \pi (n)\sim \operatorname {Li} (n)=\int _{2}^{n}{\frac {dt}{\log t}}.}
Arithmetic progressions Main articles: Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions and Green–Tao theorem An arithmetic progression is a finite or infinite sequence of numbers such that consecutive numbers in the sequence all have the same difference.
This difference is called the modulus of the progression.
For example, 3, 12, 21, 30, 39, ..., is an infinite arithmetic progression with modulus 9.
In an arithmetic progression, all the numbers have the same remainder when divided by the modulus; in this example, the remainder is 3.
Because both the modulus 9 and the remainder 3 are multiples of 3, so is every element in the sequence.
Therefore, this progression contains only one prime number, 3 itself.
In general, the infinite progression     a  ,  a  +  q  ,  a  +  2  q  ,  a  +  3  q  ,  …    {\displaystyle a,a+q,a+2q,a+3q,\dots }   can have more than one prime only when its remainder     a    {\displaystyle a}   and modulus     q    {\displaystyle q}   are relatively prime.
If they are relatively prime, Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions asserts that the progression contains infinitely many primes.
Primes in the arithmetic progressions modulo 9.
Each row of the thin horizontal band shows one of the nine possible progressions mod 9, with prime numbers marked in red.
The progressions of numbers that are 0, 3, or 6 mod 9 contain at most one prime number (the number 3); the remaining progressions of numbers that are 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8 mod 9 have infinitely many prime numbers, with similar numbers of primes in each progression.
The Green–Tao theorem shows that there are arbitrarily long finite arithmetic progressions consisting only of primes.
Prime values of quadratic polynomials The Ulam spiral .
Prime numbers (red) cluster on some diagonals and not others.
Prime values of     4   n   2    −  2  n  +  41    {\displaystyle 4n^{2}-2n+41}   are shown in blue.
Euler noted that the function      n   2    −  n  +  41    {\displaystyle n^{2}-n+41}   yields prime numbers for     1  ≤  n  ≤  40    {\displaystyle 1\leq n\leq 40}   , although composite numbers appear among its later values.
The search for an explanation for this phenomenon led to the deep algebraic number theory of Heegner numbers and the class number problem .
The Hardy–Littlewood conjecture F predicts the density of primes among the values of quadratic polynomials with integer coefficients in terms of the logarithmic integral and the polynomial coefficients.
No quadratic polynomial has been proven to take infinitely many prime values.
The Ulam spiral arranges the natural numbers in a two-dimensional grid, spiraling in concentric squares surrounding the origin with the prime numbers highlighted.
Visually, the primes appear to cluster on certain diagonals and not others, suggesting that some quadratic polynomials take prime values more often than others.
Zeta function and the Riemann hypothesis Main article: Riemann hypothesis Plot of the absolute values of the zeta function, showing some of its features One of the most famous unsolved questions in mathematics, dating from 1859, and one of the Millennium Prize Problems , is the Riemann hypothesis , which asks where the zeros of the Riemann zeta function      ζ  (  s  )    {\displaystyle \zeta (s)}   are located.
This function is an analytic function on the complex numbers .
For complex numbers     s    {\displaystyle s}   with real part greater than one it equals both an infinite sum over all integers, and an infinite product over the prime numbers,     ζ  (  s  )  =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞      1   n   s      =   ∏   p   prime       1   1  −   p   −  s       .
{\displaystyle \zeta (s)=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{n^{s}}}=\prod _{p{\text{ prime}}}{\frac {1}{1-p^{-s}}}.}
This equality between a sum and a product, discovered by Euler, is called an Euler product .
The Euler product can be derived from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, and shows the close connection between the zeta function and the prime numbers.
It leads to another proof that there are infinitely many primes: if there were only finitely many,
then the sum-product equality would also be valid at     s  =  1    {\displaystyle s=1}   , but the sum would diverge (it is the harmonic series      1  +     1  2     +     1  3     +  …    {\displaystyle 1+{\tfrac {1}{2}}+{\tfrac {1}{3}}+\dots }   ) while the product would be finite, a contradiction.
The Riemann hypothesis states that the zeros of the zeta-function are all either negative even numbers, or complex numbers with real part equal to 1/2.
The original proof of the prime number theorem was based on a weak form of this hypothesis, that there are no zeros with real part equal to 1,   although other more elementary proofs have been found.
The prime-counting function can be expressed by Riemann's explicit formula as a sum in which each term comes from one of the zeros of the zeta function; the main term of this sum is the logarithmic integral, and the remaining terms cause the sum to fluctuate above and below the main term.
In this sense, the zeros control how regularly the prime numbers are distributed.
If the Riemann hypothesis is true, these fluctuations will be small, and the asymptotic distribution of primes given by the prime number theorem will also hold over much shorter intervals (of length about the square root of     x    {\displaystyle x}   for intervals near a number     x    {\displaystyle x}   ).
Abstract algebra Modular arithmetic and finite fields Main article: Modular arithmetic Modular arithmetic modifies usual arithmetic by only using the numbers     {  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  …  ,  n  −  1  }    {\displaystyle \{0,1,2,\dots ,n-1\}}   , for a natural number     n    {\displaystyle n}   called the modulus.
Any other natural number can be mapped into this system by replacing it by its remainder after division by     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Modular sums, differences and products are calculated by performing the same replacement by the remainder
on the result of the usual sum, difference, or product of integers.
Equality of integers corresponds to congruence in modular arithmetic:     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   are congruent (written     x  ≡  y    {\displaystyle x\equiv y}   mod     n    {\displaystyle n}   ) when they have the same remainder after division by     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
However, in this system of numbers, division by all nonzero numbers is possible if and only if the modulus is prime.
For instance, with the prime number     7    {\displaystyle 7}   as modulus, division by     3    {\displaystyle 3}   is possible:     2   /   3  ≡  3   mod   7      {\displaystyle 2/3\equiv 3{\bmod {7}}}   , because clearing denominators by multiplying both sides by     3    {\displaystyle 3}   gives the valid formula     2  ≡  9   mod   7      {\displaystyle 2\equiv 9{\bmod {7}}}   .
However, with the composite modulus     6    {\displaystyle 6}   , division by     3    {\displaystyle 3}   is impossible.
There is no valid solution to     2   /   3  ≡  x   mod   6      {\displaystyle 2/3\equiv x{\bmod {6}}}   : clearing denominators by multiplying by     3    {\displaystyle 3}   causes the left-hand side to become     2    {\displaystyle 2}   while the right-hand side becomes either     0    {\displaystyle 0}   or     3    {\displaystyle 3}   .
In the terminology of abstract algebra , the ability to perform division means that modular arithmetic modulo a prime number forms a field or, more specifically, a finite field , while other moduli only give a ring but not a field.
Several theorems about primes can be formulated using modular arithmetic.
For instance, Fermat's little theorem states that if     a  ≢  0    {\displaystyle a\not \equiv 0}   (mod     p    {\displaystyle p}   ), then      a   p  −  1    ≡  1    {\displaystyle a^{p-1}\equiv 1}   (mod     p    {\displaystyle p}   ).
Summing this over all choices of     a    {\displaystyle a}   gives the equation      ∑   a  =  1    p  −  1     a   p  −  1    ≡  (  p  −  1  )  ⋅  1  ≡  −  1    (  mod   p  )   ,    {\displaystyle \sum _{a=1}^{p-1}a^{p-1}\equiv (p-1)\cdot 1\equiv -1{\pmod {p}},}   valid whenever     p    {\displaystyle p}   is prime.
Giuga's conjecture says that this equation is also a sufficient condition for     p    {\displaystyle p}   to be prime.
Wilson's theorem says that an integer     p  >  1    {\displaystyle p>1}   is prime if and only if the factorial      (  p  −  1  )  !
{\displaystyle (p-1)!}
is congruent to     −  1    {\displaystyle -1}   mod     p    {\displaystyle p}   .
For a composite number      n  =  r  ⋅  s     {\displaystyle \;n=r\cdot s\;}   this cannot hold, since one of its factors divides both n and     (  n  −  1  )  !
{\displaystyle (n-1)!}
, and so     (  n  −  1  )  !
≡  −  1    (  mod   n  )     {\displaystyle (n-1)!\equiv -1{\pmod {n}}}   is impossible.
p -adic numbers Main article: p-adic number The     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic order       ν   p    (  n  )    {\displaystyle \nu _{p}(n)}   of an integer     n    {\displaystyle n}   is the number of copies of     p    {\displaystyle p}   in the prime factorization of     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
The same concept can be extended from integers to rational numbers by defining the     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic order of a fraction     m   /   n    {\displaystyle m/n}   to be      ν   p    (  m  )  −   ν   p    (  n  )    {\displaystyle \nu _{p}(m)-\nu _{p}(n)}   .
The     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic absolute value      |   q    |    p      {\displaystyle |q|_{p}}   of any rational number     q    {\displaystyle q}   is then defined as      |   q    |    p    =   p   −   ν   p    (  q  )      {\displaystyle |q|_{p}=p^{-\nu _{p}(q)}}   .
Multiplying an integer by its     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic absolute value cancels out the factors of     p    {\displaystyle p}   in its factorization, leaving only the other primes.
Just as the distance between two real numbers can be measured by the absolute value of their distance, the distance between two rational numbers can be measured by their     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic distance, the     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic absolute value of their difference.
For this definition of distance, two numbers are close together (they have a small distance) when their difference is divisible by a high power of     p    {\displaystyle p}   .
In the same way that the real numbers can be formed from the rational numbers and their distances, by adding extra limiting values to form a complete field , the rational numbers with the     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic distance can be extended to a different complete field, the     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic numbers .
This picture of an order, absolute value, and complete field derived from them can be generalized to algebraic number fields and their valuations (certain mappings from the multiplicative group of the field to a totally ordered additive group , also called orders), absolute values (certain multiplicative mappings from the field to the real numbers, also called norms),  and places (extensions to complete fields in which the given field is a dense set , also called completions).
The extension from the rational numbers to the real numbers , for instance, is a place in which the distance between numbers is the usual absolute value of their difference.
The corresponding mapping to an additive group would be the logarithm of the absolute value, although this does not meet all the requirements of a valuation.
According to Ostrowski's theorem , up to a natural notion of equivalence, the real numbers and     p    {\displaystyle p}   -adic numbers, with their orders and absolute values, are the only valuations, absolute values, and places on the rational numbers.
The local-global principle allows certain problems over the rational numbers to be solved by piecing together solutions from each of their places, again underlining the importance of primes to number theory.
Prime elements in rings Main articles: Prime element and Irreducible element The Gaussian primes with norm less than 500 A commutative ring is an algebraic structure where addition, subtraction and multiplication are defined.
The integers are a ring, and the prime numbers in the integers have been generalized to rings in two different ways, prime elements and irreducible elements .
An element     p    {\displaystyle p}   of a ring     R    {\displaystyle R}   is called prime if it is nonzero, has no multiplicative inverse (that is, it is not a unit ), and satisfies the following requirement: whenever     p    {\displaystyle p}   divides the product     x  y    {\displaystyle xy}   of two elements of     R    {\displaystyle R}   , it also divides at least one of     x    {\displaystyle x}   or     y    {\displaystyle y}   .
An element is irreducible if it is neither a unit nor the product of two other non-unit elements.
In the ring of integers, the prime and irreducible elements form the same set,     {  …  ,  −  11  ,  −  7  ,  −  5  ,  −  3  ,  −  2  ,  2  ,  3  ,  5  ,  7  ,  11  ,  …  }   .
{\displaystyle \{\dots ,-11,-7,-5,-3,-2,2,3,5,7,11,\dots \}\,.}
In an arbitrary ring, all prime elements are irreducible.
The converse does not hold in general, but does hold for unique factorization domains .
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic continues to hold (by definition) in unique factorization domains.
An example of such a domain is the Gaussian integers       Z       {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , the ring of complex numbers of the form     a  +  b  i    {\displaystyle a+bi}   where     i    {\displaystyle i}   denotes the imaginary unit and     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   are arbitrary integers.
Its prime elements are known as Gaussian primes .
Not every number that is prime among the integers remains prime in the Gaussian integers; for instance, the number 2 can be written as a product of the two Gaussian primes     1  +  i    {\displaystyle 1+i}   and     1  −  i    {\displaystyle 1-i}   .
Rational primes (the prime elements in the integers) congruent to 3 mod 4 are Gaussian primes, but rational primes congruent to 1 mod 4 are not.
This is a consequence of Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares ,
which states that an odd prime     p    {\displaystyle p}   is expressible as the sum of two squares,     p  =   x   2    +   y   2      {\displaystyle p=x^{2}+y^{2}}   , and therefore factorable as     p  =  (  x  +  i  y  )  (  x  −  i  y  )    {\displaystyle p=(x+iy)(x-iy)}   , exactly when     p    {\displaystyle p}   is 1 mod 4.
Prime ideals Main article: Prime ideals Not every ring is a unique factorization domain.
For instance, in the ring of numbers     a  +  b    −  5      {\displaystyle a+b{\sqrt {-5}}}   (for integers     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   ) the number     21    {\displaystyle 21}   has two factorizations     21  =  3  ⋅  7  =  (  1  +  2    −  5    )  (  1  −  2    −  5    )    {\displaystyle 21=3\cdot 7=(1+2{\sqrt {-5}})(1-2{\sqrt {-5}})}   , where neither of the four factors can be reduced any further, so it does not have a unique factorization.
In order to extend unique factorization to a larger class of rings, the notion of a number can be replaced with that of an ideal , a subset of the elements of a ring that contains all sums of pairs of its elements, and all products of its elements with ring elements.
Prime ideals , which generalize prime elements in the sense that the principal ideal generated by a prime element is a prime ideal, are an important tool and object of study in commutative algebra , algebraic number theory and algebraic geometry .
The prime ideals of the ring of integers are the ideals (0), (2), (3), (5), (7), (11), ...
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic generalizes to the Lasker–Noether theorem , which expresses every ideal in a Noetherian  commutative ring as an intersection of primary ideals , which are the appropriate generalizations of prime powers .
The spectrum of a ring is a geometric space whose points are the prime ideals of the ring.
Arithmetic geometry also benefits from this notion, and many concepts exist in both geometry and number theory.
For example, factorization or ramification of prime ideals when lifted to an extension field , a basic problem of algebraic number theory, bears some resemblance with ramification in geometry .
These concepts can even assist with in number-theoretic questions solely concerned with integers.
For example, prime ideals in the ring of integers of quadratic number fields can be used in proving quadratic reciprocity , a statement that concerns the existence of square roots modulo integer prime numbers.
Early attempts to prove Fermat's Last Theorem led to Kummer 's introduction of regular primes , integer prime numbers connected with the failure of unique factorization in the cyclotomic integers .
The question of how many integer prime numbers factor into a product of multiple prime ideals in an algebraic number field is addressed by Chebotarev's density theorem , which (when applied to the cyclotomic integers) has Dirichlet's theorem on primes in arithmetic progressions as a special case.
Group theory In the theory of finite groups the Sylow theorems imply that, if a power of a prime number      p   n      {\displaystyle p^{n}}   divides the order of a group , then the group has a subgroup of order      p   n      {\displaystyle p^{n}}   .
By Lagrange's theorem , any group of prime order is a cyclic group ,
and by Burnside's theorem any group whose order is divisible by only two primes is solvable .
Computational methods The small gear in this piece of farm equipment has 13 teeth, a prime number, and the middle gear has 21, relatively prime to 13.
For a long time, number theory in general, and the study of prime numbers in particular, was seen as the canonical example of pure mathematics, with no applications outside of mathematics  other than the use of prime numbered gear teeth to distribute wear evenly.
In particular, number theorists such as British mathematician G.
H.
Hardy prided themselves on doing work that had absolutely no military significance.
This vision of the purity of number theory was shattered in the 1970s, when it was publicly announced that prime numbers could be used as the basis for the creation of public-key cryptography algorithms.
These applications have led to significant study of algorithms for computing with prime numbers, and in particular of primality testing , methods for determining whether a given number is prime.
The most basic primality testing routine, trial division, is too slow to be useful for large numbers.
One group of modern primality tests is applicable to arbitrary numbers, while more efficient tests are available for numbers of special types.
Most primality tests only tell whether their argument is prime or not.
Routines that also provide a prime factor of composite arguments (or all of its prime factors) are called factorization algorithms.
Prime numbers are also used in computing for checksums , hash tables , and pseudorandom number generators .
Trial division Main article: Trial division The most basic method of checking the primality of a given integer     n    {\displaystyle n}   is called trial division .
This method divides     n    {\displaystyle n}   by each integer from 2 up to the square root of     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Any such integer dividing     n    {\displaystyle n}   evenly establishes     n    {\displaystyle n}   as composite; otherwise it is prime.
Integers larger than the square root do not need to be checked because, whenever     n  =  a  ⋅  b    {\displaystyle n=a\cdot b}   , one of the two factors     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   is less than or equal to the square root of     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Another optimization is to check only primes as factors in this range.
For instance, to check whether 37 is prime, this method divides it by the primes in the range from 2 to       37      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {37}}}   , which are 2, 3, and 5.
Each division produces a nonzero remainder, so 37 is indeed prime.
Although this method is simple to describe, it is impractical for testing the primality of large integers, because the number of tests that it performs grows exponentially as a function of the number of digits of these integers.
However, trial division is still used, with a smaller limit than the square root on the divisor size, to quickly discover composite numbers with small factors, before using more complicated methods on the numbers that pass this filter.
Sieves The sieve of Eratosthenes starts with all numbers unmarked (gray).
It repeatedly finds the first unmarked number, marks it as prime (dark colors) and marks its square and all later multiples as composite (lighter colors).
After marking the multiples of 2 (red), 3 (green), 5 (blue), and 7 (yellow), all primes up to the square root of the table size have been processed, and all remaining unmarked numbers (11, 13, etc.)
are marked as primes (magenta).
Main article: Sieve of Eratosthenes Before computers, mathematical tables listing all of the primes or prime factorizations up to a given limit were commonly printed.
The oldest method for generating a list of primes is called the sieve of Eratosthenes.
The animation shows an optimized variant of this method.
Another more asymptotically efficient sieving method for the same problem is the sieve of Atkin .
In advanced mathematics, sieve theory applies similar methods to other problems.
Primality testing versus primality proving Some of the fastest modern tests for whether an arbitrary given number     n    {\displaystyle n}   is prime are probabilistic (or Monte Carlo ) algorithms, meaning that they have a small random chance of producing an incorrect answer.
For instance the Solovay–Strassen primality test on a given number     p    {\displaystyle p}   chooses a number     a    {\displaystyle a}   randomly from     2    {\displaystyle 2}   through     p  −  2    {\displaystyle p-2}   and uses modular exponentiation to check
whether      a   (  p  −  1  )   /   2    ±  1    {\displaystyle a^{(p-1)/2}\pm 1}   is divisible by     p    {\displaystyle p}   .
If so, it answers yes and otherwise it answers no.
If     p    {\displaystyle p}   really is prime, it will always answer yes, but if     p    {\displaystyle p}   is composite then it answers yes with probability at most 1/2 and no with probability at least 1/2.
If this test is repeated     n    {\displaystyle n}   times on the same number,
the probability that a composite number could pass the test every time is at most     1   /    2   n      {\displaystyle 1/2^{n}}   .
Because this decreases exponentially with the number of tests, it provides high confidence (although not certainty) that a number that passes the repeated test is prime.
On the other hand, if the test ever fails, then the number is certainly composite.
A composite number that passes such a test is called a pseudoprime .
In contrast, some other algorithms guarantee that their answer will always be correct: primes will always be determined to be prime and composites will always be determined to be composite.
For instance, this is true of trial division.
The algorithms with guaranteed-correct output include both deterministic (non-random) algorithms, such as the AKS primality test ,  and randomized Las Vegas algorithms where the random choices made by the algorithm do not affect its final answer, such as some variations of elliptic curve primality proving .
When the elliptic curve method concludes that a number is prime, it provides primality certificate that can be verified quickly.
The elliptic curve primality test is the fastest in practice of the guaranteed-correct primality tests, but its runtime analysis is based on heuristic arguments rather than rigorous proofs.
The AKS primality test has mathematically proven time complexity, but is slower than elliptic curve primality proving in practice.
These methods can be used to generate large random prime numbers, by generating and testing random numbers until finding one that is prime;
when doing this, a faster probabilistic test can quickly eliminate most composite numbers before a guaranteed-correct algorithm is used to verify that the remaining numbers are prime.
The following table lists some of these tests.
Their running time is given in terms of     n    {\displaystyle n}   , the number to be tested and, for probabilistic algorithms, the number     k    {\displaystyle k}   of tests performed.
Moreover,     ε    {\displaystyle \varepsilon }   is an arbitrarily small positive number, and log is the logarithm to an unspecified base.
The big O notation means that each time bound should be multiplied by a constant factor to convert it from dimensionless units to units of time; this factor depends on implementation details such as the type of computer used to run the algorithm, but not on the input parameters     n    {\displaystyle n}   and     k    {\displaystyle k}   .
Test  Developed in  Type  Running time  Notes  References   AKS primality test   2002  deterministic      O  (  (  log  ⁡  n   )   6  +  ε    )    {\displaystyle O((\log n)^{6+\varepsilon })}            Elliptic curve primality proving   1986  Las Vegas      O  (  (  log  ⁡  n   )   4  +  ε    )    {\displaystyle O((\log n)^{4+\varepsilon })}    heuristically         Baillie–PSW primality test   1980  Monte Carlo      O  (  (  log  ⁡  n   )   2  +  ε    )    {\displaystyle O((\log n)^{2+\varepsilon })}            Miller–Rabin primality test   1980  Monte Carlo      O  (  k  (  log  ⁡  n   )   2  +  ε    )    {\displaystyle O(k(\log n)^{2+\varepsilon })}     error probability      4   −  k      {\displaystyle 4^{-k}}         Solovay–Strassen primality test   1977  Monte Carlo      O  (  k  (  log  ⁡  n   )   2  +  ε    )    {\displaystyle O(k(\log n)^{2+\varepsilon })}     error probability      2   −  k      {\displaystyle 2^{-k}}       Special-purpose algorithms and the largest known prime Further information: List of prime numbers In addition to the aforementioned tests that apply to any natural number, some numbers of a special form can be tested for primality more quickly.
For example, the Lucas–Lehmer primality test can determine whether a Mersenne number (one less than a power of two ) is prime, deterministically,
in the same time as a single iteration of the Miller–Rabin test.
This is why since 1992 (as of December 2018  ) the largest known prime has always been a Mersenne prime.
It is conjectured that there are infinitely many Mersenne primes.
The following table gives the largest known primes of various types.
Some of these primes have been found using distributed computing .
In 2009, the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search project was awarded a US$100,000 prize for first discovering a prime with at least 10 million digits.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation also offers $150,000 and $250,000 for primes with at least 100 million digits and 1 billion digits, respectively.
Type  Prime  Number of decimal digits  Date  Found by   Mersenne prime   2 82,589,933 − 1  24,862,048  December 7, 2018    Patrick Laroche, Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search    Proth prime   10,223 × 2 31,172,165 + 1  9,383,761  October 31, 2016    Péter Szabolcs, PrimeGrid     factorial prime   208,003!
− 1  1,015,843  July 2016  Sou Fukui     primorial prime    1,098,133# − 1  476,311  March 2012  James P.
Burt, PrimeGrid     twin primes   2,996,863,034,895 × 2 1,290,000 ± 1  388,342  September 2016  Tom Greer, PrimeGrid   Integer factorization Main article: Integer factorization Given a composite integer     n    {\displaystyle n}   , the task of providing one (or all) prime factors is referred to as factorization of     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
It is significantly more difficult than primality testing,  and although many factorization algorithms are known, they are slower than the fastest primality testing methods.
Trial division and Pollard's rho algorithm can be used to find very small factors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   ,  and elliptic curve factorization can be effective when     n    {\displaystyle n}   has factors of moderate size.
Methods suitable for arbitrary large numbers that do not depend on the size of its factors include the quadratic sieve and general number field sieve .
As with primality testing, there are also factorization algorithms that require their input to have a special form, including the special number field sieve .
As of December 2019  the largest number known to have been factored by a general-purpose algorithm is RSA-240 , which has 240 decimal digits (795 bits) and is the product of two large primes.
Shor's algorithm can factor any integer in a polynomial number of steps on a quantum computer .
However, current technology can only run this algorithm for very small numbers.
As of October 2012  the largest number that has been factored by a quantum computer running Shor's algorithm is 21.
Other computational applications Several public-key cryptography algorithms, such as RSA and the Diffie–Hellman key exchange , are based on large prime numbers (2048- bit primes are common).
RSA relies on the assumption that it is much easier (that is, more efficient) to perform the multiplication of two (large) numbers     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   than to calculate     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   (assumed coprime ) if only the product     x  y    {\displaystyle xy}   is known.
The Diffie–Hellman key exchange relies on the fact that there are efficient algorithms for modular exponentiation (computing      a   b     mod   c      {\displaystyle a^{b}{\bmod {c}}}   ), while the reverse operation (the discrete logarithm ) is thought to be a hard problem.
Prime numbers are frequently used for hash tables .
For instance the original method of Carter and Wegman for universal hashing was based on computing hash functions by choosing random linear functions modulo large prime numbers.
Carter and Wegman generalized this method to     k    {\displaystyle k}   -independent hashing by using higher-degree polynomials, again modulo large primes.
As well as in the hash function, prime numbers are used for the hash table size in quadratic probing based hash tables to ensure that the probe sequence covers the whole table.
Some checksum methods are based on the mathematics of prime numbers.
For instance the checksums used in International Standard Book Numbers are defined by taking the rest of the number modulo 11, a prime number.
Because 11 is prime this method can detect both single-digit errors and transpositions of adjacent digits.
Another checksum method, Adler-32 , uses arithmetic modulo 65521, the largest prime number less than      2   16      {\displaystyle 2^{16}}   .
Prime numbers are also used in pseudorandom number generators including linear congruential generators  and the Mersenne Twister .
Other applications Prime numbers are of central importance to number theory but also have many applications to other areas within mathematics, including abstract algebra and elementary geometry.
For example, it is possible to place prime numbers of points in a two-dimensional grid so that no three are in a line , or so that every triangle formed by three of the points has large area .
Another example is Eisenstein's criterion , a test for whether a polynomial is irreducible based on divisibility of its coefficients by a prime number and its square.
The connected sum of two prime knots The concept of a prime number is so important that it has been generalized in different ways in various branches of mathematics.
Generally, "prime" indicates minimality or indecomposability, in an appropriate sense.
For example, the prime field of a given field is its smallest subfield that contains both 0 and 1.
It is either the field of rational numbers or a finite field with a prime number of elements, whence the name.
Often a second, additional meaning is intended by using the word prime, namely that any object can be, essentially uniquely, decomposed into its prime components.
For example, in knot theory , a prime knot is a knot that is indecomposable in the sense that it cannot be written as the connected sum of two nontrivial knots.
Any knot can be uniquely expressed as a connected sum of prime knots.
The prime decomposition of 3-manifolds is another example of this type.
Beyond mathematics and computing, prime numbers have potential connections to quantum mechanics , and have been used metaphorically in the arts and literature.
They have also been used in evolutionary biology to explain the life cycles of cicadas .
Constructible polygons and polygon partitions Construction of a regular pentagon using straightedge and compass.
This is only possible because 5 is a Fermat prime .
Fermat primes are primes of the form      F   k    =   2    2   k      +  1  ,    {\displaystyle F_{k}=2^{2^{k}}+1,}   with     k    {\displaystyle k}   a nonnegative integer .
They are named after Pierre de Fermat , who conjectured that all such numbers are prime.
The first five of these numbers – 3, 5, 17, 257, and 65,537 – are prime,  but      F   5      {\displaystyle F_{5}}   is composite and so are all other Fermat numbers that have been verified as of 2017.
A regular     n    {\displaystyle n}   -gon is constructible using straightedge and compass if and only if the odd prime factors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   (if any) are distinct Fermat primes.
Likewise, a regular     n    {\displaystyle n}   -gon may be constructed using straightedge, compass, and an angle trisector if and only if the prime factors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   are any number of copies of 2 or 3 together with a (possibly empty) set of distinct Pierpont primes , primes of the form      2   a     3   b    +  1    {\displaystyle 2^{a}3^{b}+1}   .
It is possible to partition any convex polygon into     n    {\displaystyle n}   smaller convex polygons of equal area and equal perimeter, when     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a power of a prime number , but this is not known for other values of     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Quantum mechanics Beginning with the work of Hugh Montgomery and Freeman Dyson in the 1970s, mathematicians and physicists have speculated that the zeros of the Riemann zeta function are connected to the energy levels of quantum systems .
Prime numbers are also significant in quantum information science , thanks to mathematical structures such as mutually unbiased bases and symmetric informationally complete positive-operator-valued measures .
Biology The evolutionary strategy used by cicadas of the genus Magicicada makes use of prime numbers.
These insects spend most of their lives as grubs underground.
They only pupate and then emerge from their burrows after 7, 13 or 17 years, at which point they fly about, breed, and then die after a few weeks at most.
Biologists theorize that these prime-numbered breeding cycle lengths have evolved in order to prevent predators from synchronizing with these cycles.
In contrast, the multi-year periods between flowering in bamboo plants are hypothesized to be smooth numbers , having only small prime numbers in their factorizations.
Arts and literature Prime numbers have influenced many artists and writers.
The French composer  Olivier Messiaen used prime numbers to create ametrical music through "natural phenomena".
In works such as La Nativité du Seigneur (1935) and Quatre études de rythme (1949–50), he simultaneously employs motifs with lengths given by different prime numbers to create unpredictable rhythms: the primes 41, 43, 47 and 53 appear in the third étude, "Neumes rythmiques".
According to Messiaen this way of composing was "inspired by the movements of nature, movements of free and unequal durations".
In his science fiction novel Contact , scientist Carl Sagan suggested that prime factorization could be used as a means of establishing two-dimensional image planes in communications with aliens, an idea that he had first developed informally with American astronomer Frank Drake in 1975.
In the novel The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time by Mark Haddon , the narrator arranges the sections of the story by consecutive prime numbers as a way to convey the mental state of its main character, a mathematically gifted teen with Asperger syndrome .
Prime numbers are used as a metaphor for loneliness and isolation in the Paolo Giordano novel The Solitude of Prime Numbers , in which they are portrayed as "outsiders" among integers.
Notes   ^  A 44-digit prime number found in 1951 by Aimé Ferrier with a mechanical calculator remains the largest prime not to have been found with the aid of electronic computers.
^ a  b  For instance, Beiler writes that number theorist Ernst Kummer loved his ideal numbers , closely related to the primes, "because they had not soiled themselves with any practical applications",  and Katz writes that Edmund Landau , known for his work on the distribution of primes, "loathed practical applications of mathematics", and for this reason avoided subjects such as geometry that had already shown themselves to be useful.
^  In this test, the     ±  1    {\displaystyle \pm 1}   term is negative if     a    {\displaystyle a}   is a square modulo the given (supposed) prime     p    {\displaystyle p}   , and positive otherwise.
More generally, for non-prime values of     p    {\displaystyle p}   , the     ±  1    {\displaystyle \pm 1}   term is the (negated) Jacobi symbol , which can be calculated using quadratic reciprocity .
^  Indeed, much of the analysis of elliptic curve primality proving is based on the assumption that the input to the algorithm has already passed a probabilistic test.
^  The primorial function of     n    {\displaystyle n}   , denoted by     n  #    {\displaystyle n\#}   , yields the product of the prime numbers up to     n    {\displaystyle n}   , and a primorial prime is a prime of one of the forms     n  #  ±  1    {\displaystyle n\#\pm 1}   .
References   ^ a  b  "GIMPS Project Discovers Largest Known Prime Number: 2 82,589,933 -1" .
Mersenne Research, Inc .
21 December 2018 .
Retrieved 21 December 2018 .
^  Gardiner, Anthony (1997).
The Mathematical Olympiad Handbook: An Introduction to Problem Solving Based on the First 32 British Mathematical Olympiads 1965–1996 .
Oxford University Press.
p.
26 .
ISBN  978-0-19-850105-3 .
^  Henderson, Anne (2014).
Dyslexia, Dyscalculia and Mathematics: A practical guide (2nd ed.).
p.
62.
ISBN  978-1-136-63662-2 .
^  Adler, Irving (1960).
The Giant Golden Book of Mathematics: Exploring the World of Numbers and Space .
Golden Press.
p.
16 .
OCLC  6975809 .
^  Leff, Lawrence S.
(2000).
Math Workbook for the SAT I .
Barron's Educational Series.
p.
360 .
ISBN  978-0-7641-0768-9 .
^  Dudley, Underwood (1978).
"Section 2: Unique factorization" .
Elementary number theory (2nd ed.).
W.H.
Freeman and Co. p.
10 .
ISBN  978-0-7167-0076-0 .
^  Sierpiński, Wacław (1988).
Elementary Theory of Numbers .
North-Holland Mathematical Library.
31 (2nd ed.).
Elsevier.
p.
113.
ISBN  978-0-08-096019-7 .
^ a  b  Ziegler, Günter M.
(2004).
"The great prime number record races".
Notices of the American Mathematical Society .
51 (4): 414–416.
MR  2039814 .
^  Stillwell, John (1997).
Numbers and Geometry .
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics.
ISBN  978-0-387-98289-2 .
^  Sierpiński, Wacław (1964).
A Selection of Problems in the Theory of Numbers .
New York: Macmillan.
p.
40 .
MR  0170843 .
^  Nathanson, Melvyn B.
(2000).
"Notations and Conventions" .
Elementary Methods in Number Theory .
Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
195.
ISBN  978-0-387-22738-2 .
MR  1732941 .
^  Faticoni, Theodore G.
(2012).
The Mathematics of Infinity: A Guide to Great Ideas .
Pure and Applied Mathematics: A Wiley Series of Texts, Monographs and Tracts.
111 (2nd ed.).
John Wiley & Sons.
p.
44.
ISBN  978-1-118-24382-4 .
^  Bruins, Evert Marie, review in Mathematical Reviews of Gillings, R.J. (1974).
"The recto of the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus.
How did the ancient Egyptian scribe prepare it?".
12 (4): 291–298.
doi : 10.1007/BF01307175 .
MR  0497458 .
S2CID  121046003 .
^ a  b  Stillwell, John (2010).
Mathematics and Its History .
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics (3rd ed.).
p.
40.
ISBN  978-1-4419-6052-8 .
^ a  b  Pomerance, Carl (December 1982).
"The Search for Prime Numbers".
Scientific American .
247 (6): 136–147.
Bibcode : 1982SciAm.247f.136P .
doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican1282-136 .
JSTOR  24966751 .
^ a  b  c  d  Mollin, Richard A.
(2002).
"A brief history of factoring and primality testing B.
C.
(before computers)".
Mathematics Magazine .
75 (1): 18–29.
doi : 10.2307/3219180 .
JSTOR  3219180 .
MR  2107288 .
^  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.
 "Abu Ali al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham" .
^  Sandifer 2007 , 8.
Fermat's Little Theorem (November 2003), p.
45   ^  Sandifer, C.
Edward (2014).
How Euler Did Even More .
Mathematical Association of America.
p.
42.
ISBN  978-0-88385-584-3 .
^  Koshy, Thomas (2002).
Elementary Number Theory with Applications .
Academic Press.
p.
369.
ISBN  978-0-12-421171-1 .
^  Yuan, Wang (2002).
Goldbach Conjecture .
Series In Pure Mathematics.
4 (2nd ed.).
World Scientific.
p.
21.
ISBN  978-981-4487-52-8 .
^  Narkiewicz, Wladyslaw (2000).
"1.2 Sum of Reciprocals of Primes" .
The Development of Prime Number Theory: From Euclid to Hardy and Littlewood .
Springer Monographs in Mathematics.
p.
11.
ISBN  978-3-540-66289-1 .
^  Tchebychev, P.
(1852).
"Mémoire sur les nombres premiers"  (PDF) .
Journal de mathématiques pures et appliquées .
Série 1 (in French): 366–390.
(Proof of the postulate: 371–382).
Also see Mémoires de l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St. Pétersbourg, vol.
7, pp.
15–33, 1854   ^  Apostol, Tom M.
(2000).
"A centennial history of the prime number theorem" .
In Bambah, R.P.
; Dumir, V.C.
; Hans-Gill, R.J.
Number Theory .
Trends in Mathematics.
Basel: Birkhäuser.
1–14.
MR  1764793 .
^  Apostol, Tom M.
(1976).
"7.
Dirichlet's Theorem on Primes in Arithmetical Progressions" .
Introduction to Analytic Number Theory .
New York; Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
146–156.
MR  0434929 .
^  Chabert, Jean-Luc (2012).
A History of Algorithms: From the Pebble to the Microchip .
p.
261.
ISBN  978-3-642-18192-4 .
^  Rosen, Kenneth H.
(2000).
"Theorem 9.20.
Proth's Primality Test".
Elementary Number Theory and Its Applications (4th ed.).
Addison-Wesley.
p.
342.
ISBN  978-0-201-87073-2 .
^  Cooper, S.
Barry; Hodges, Andrew (2016).
The Once and Future Turing .
37–38.
ISBN  978-1-107-01083-3 .
^  Rosen 2000 , p.
245.
^  Beiler, Albert H.
(1999) .
Recreations in the Theory of Numbers: The Queen of Mathematics Entertains .
p.
2.
ISBN  978-0-486-21096-4 .
OCLC  444171535 .
^  Katz, Shaul (2004).
"Berlin roots – Zionist incarnation: the ethos of pure mathematics and the beginnings of the Einstein Institute of Mathematics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem".
Science in Context .
17 (1–2): 199–234.
doi : 10.1017/S0269889704000092 .
MR  2089305 .
S2CID  145575536 .
^ a  b  c  Kraft, James S.; Washington, Lawrence C.
(2014).
Elementary Number Theory .
Textbooks in mathematics.
CRC Press.
ISBN  978-1-4987-0269-0 .
^  Bauer, Craig P.
(2013).
Secret History: The Story of Cryptology .
Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications.
p.
468.
ISBN  978-1-4665-6186-1 .
^  Klee, Victor ; Wagon, Stan (1991).
Old and New Unsolved Problems in Plane Geometry and Number Theory .
Dolciani mathematical expositions.
11.
p.
224.
ISBN  978-0-88385-315-3 .
^ a  b  Neale 2017 , pp.
18, 47.
^ a  b  Caldwell, Chris K.; Reddick, Angela; Xiong, Yeng; Keller, Wilfrid (2012).
"The history of the primality of one: a selection of sources" .
Journal of Integer Sequences .
15 (9): Article 12.9.8.
MR  3005523 .
For a selection of quotes from and about the ancient Greek positions on the status of 1 and 2, see in particular pp.
3–4.
For the Islamic mathematicians, see p.
6.
^  Tarán, Leonardo (1981).
Speusippus of Athens: A Critical Study With a Collection of the Related Texts and Commentary .
Philosophia Antiqua : A Series of Monographs on Ancient Philosophy.
39.
Brill.
35–38.
ISBN  978-90-04-06505-5 .
^  Caldwell et al.
2012 , pp.
7–13.
See in particular the entries for Stevin, Brancker, Wallis, and Prestet.
2012 , p.
15.
^ a  b  c  Caldwell, Chris K.; Xiong, Yeng (2012).
"What is the smallest prime?"
(PDF) .
15 (9): Article 12.9.7.
MR  3005530 .
^  Riesel, Hans (1994).
Prime Numbers and Computer Methods for Factorization (2nd ed.).
Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser.
p.
36.
doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-0251-6 .
ISBN  978-0-8176-3743-9 .
MR  1292250 .
^ a  b  Conway, John Horton ; Guy, Richard K.
(1996).
The Book of Numbers .
New York: Copernicus.
129–130 .
doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-4072-3 .
ISBN  978-0-387-97993-9 .
MR  1411676 .
^  For the totient, see Sierpiński 1988 , p.
245 .
For the sum of divisors, see Sandifer, C.
Edward (2007).
How Euler Did It .
MAA Spectrum.
p.
59.
ISBN  978-0-88385-563-8 .
^  Smith, Karl J.
(2011).
The Nature of Mathematics (12th ed.).
Cengage Learning.
p.
188.
ISBN  978-0-538-73758-6 .
^  Dudley 1978 , Section 2, Theorem 2, p.
16 ; Neale, Vicky (2017).
Closing the Gap: The Quest to Understand Prime Numbers .
p.
107 .
ISBN  978-0-19-109243-5 .
^  du Sautoy, Marcus (2003).
The Music of the Primes: Searching to Solve the Greatest Mystery in Mathematics .
Harper Collins.
p.
23 .
ISBN  978-0-06-093558-0 .
^  Dudley 1978 , Section 2, Lemma 5, p.
15 ; Higgins, Peter M.
(1998).
Mathematics for the Curious .
77–78.
ISBN  978-0-19-150050-3 .
^  Rotman, Joseph J.
A First Course in Abstract Algebra (2nd ed.).
Prentice Hall.
Problem 1.40, p.
56.
ISBN  978-0-13-011584-3 .
^  Letter in Latin from Goldbach to Euler, July 1730.
^  Furstenberg, Harry (1955).
"On the infinitude of primes".
American Mathematical Monthly .
62 (5): 353.
doi : 10.2307/2307043 .
JSTOR  2307043 .
MR  0068566 .
^  Ribenboim, Paulo (2004).
The little book of bigger primes .
Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag.
p.
4.
ISBN  978-0-387-20169-6 .
^  Euclid's Elements , Book IX, Proposition 20.
See David Joyce's English translation of Euclid's proof or Williamson, James (1782).
The Elements of Euclid, With Dissertations .
p.
63.
OCLC  642232959 .
^  Vardi, Ilan (1991).
Computational Recreations in Mathematica .
82–89.
ISBN  978-0-201-52989-0 .
^ a  b  c  Matiyasevich, Yuri V.
(1999).
"Formulas for prime numbers" .
In Tabachnikov, Serge (ed.).
Kvant Selecta: Algebra and Analysis .
II.
American Mathematical Society .
13–24.
ISBN  978-0-8218-1915-9 .
^  Mackinnon, Nick (June 1987).
"Prime number formulae".
71 (456): 113–114.
doi : 10.2307/3616496 .
JSTOR  3616496 .
S2CID  171537609 .
^  Wright, E.M. (1951).
"A prime-representing function".
58 (9): 616–618.
doi : 10.2307/2306356 .
JSTOR  2306356 .
^  Guy 2013 , p.
vii .
^  Guy 2013 , C1 Goldbach's conjecture, pp.
105–107 .
^  Oliveira e Silva, Tomás; Herzog, Siegfried; Pardi, Silvio (2014).
"Empirical verification of the even Goldbach conjecture and computation of prime gaps up to     4  ⋅   10   18      {\displaystyle 4\cdot 10^{18}}   " .
Mathematics of Computation .
83 (288): 2033–2060.
doi : 10.1090/S0025-5718-2013-02787-1 .
MR  3194140 .
^  Tao 2009 , 3.1 Structure and randomness in the prime numbers, pp.
239–247 .
See especially p.
239.
^  Guy 2013 , p.
159.
^  Ramaré, Olivier (1995).
"On Šnirel'man's constant" .
Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa .
22 (4): 645–706.
MR  1375315 .
Archived from the original on 2022-02-09 .
Retrieved 2018-01-23 .
^  Rassias, Michael Th.
(2017).
Goldbach's Problem: Selected Topics .
Cham: Springer.
p.
vii.
doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-57914-6 .
ISBN  978-3-319-57912-2 .
MR  3674356 .
^  Koshy 2002 , Theorem 2.14, p.
109 .
Riesel 1994 gives a similar argument using the primorial in place of the factorial.
^ a  b  Riesel 1994 , " Large gaps between consecutive primes ", pp.
78–79.
^  Sloane, N.
J.
A.
(ed.).
"Sequence A100964 (Smallest prime number that begins a prime gap of at least 2n)" .
The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences .
OEIS Foundation.
^ a  b  c  Ribenboim 2004 , Gaps between primes, pp.
186–192.
^ a  b  Ribenboim 2004 , p.
183.
^  Chan, Joel (February 1996).
"Prime time!".
Math Horizons .
3 (3): 23–25.
doi : 10.1080/10724117.1996.11974965 .
JSTOR  25678057 .
Note that Chan lists Legendre's conjecture as "Sierpinski's Postulate".
^  Ribenboim 2004 , Prime     k    {\displaystyle k}   -tuples conjecture, pp.
201–202.
^  Sandifer 2007 , Chapter 35, Estimating the Basel problem, pp.
205–208 .
^  Ogilvy, C.S.
; Anderson, J.T.
(1988).
Excursions in Number Theory .
Dover Publications Inc.
pp.
29–35.
ISBN  978-0-486-25778-5 .
^  Apostol 1976 , Section 1.6, Theorem 1.13   ^  Apostol 1976 , Section 4.8, Theorem 4.12   ^ a  b  Miller, Steven J.; Takloo-Bighash, Ramin (2006).
An Invitation to Modern Number Theory .
43–44.
ISBN  978-0-691-12060-7 .
^  Crandall & Pomerance 2005 , p.
6 .
^  Crandall & Pomerance 2005 , Section 3.7, Counting primes, pp.
152–162 .
^ a  b  Crandall & Pomerance 2005 , p.
10 .
^  du Sautoy, Marcus (2011).
"What are the odds that your telephone number is prime?"
The Number Mysteries: A Mathematical Odyssey through Everyday Life .
St. Martin's Press.
50–52.
ISBN  978-0-230-12028-0 .
^  Apostol 1976 , Section 4.6, Theorem 4.7   ^  Gelfand, I.M.
; Shen, Alexander (2003).
Algebra .
p.
37.
ISBN  978-0-8176-3677-7 .
^  Mollin, Richard A.
(1997).
Fundamental Number Theory with Applications .
p.
76.
ISBN  978-0-8493-3987-5 .
^  Crandall & Pomerance 2005 , Theorem 1.1.5, p.
12 .
^  Green, Ben ; Tao, Terence (2008).
"The primes contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions".
Annals of Mathematics .
167 (2): 481–547.
arXiv : math.NT/0404188 .
doi : 10.4007/annals.2008.167.481 .
S2CID  1883951 .
^  Hua, L.K.
(2009) .
Additive Theory of Prime Numbers .
Translations of Mathematical Monographs.
13.
Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.
176–177.
ISBN  978-0-8218-4942-2 .
MR  0194404 .
OCLC  824812353 .
^  The sequence of these primes, starting at     n  =  1    {\displaystyle n=1}   rather than     n  =  0    {\displaystyle n=0}   , is listed by Lava, Paolo Pietro; Balzarotti, Giorgio (2010).
"Chapter 33.
Formule fortunate" .
103 curiosità matematiche: Teoria dei numeri, delle cifre e delle relazioni nella matematica contemporanea (in Italian).
Ulrico Hoepli Editore S.p.A. p.
133.
ISBN  978-88-203-5804-4 .
^  Chamberland, Marc (2015).
"The Heegner numbers" .
Single Digits: In Praise of Small Numbers .
213–215.
ISBN  978-1-4008-6569-7 .
^ a  b  Guy, Richard (2013).
"A1 Prime values of quadratic functions" .
Unsolved Problems in Number Theory .
Problem Books in Mathematics (3rd ed.).
7–10.
ISBN  978-0-387-26677-0 .
^  Patterson, S.J.
An introduction to the theory of the Riemann zeta-function .
Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
p.
1.
doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511623707 .
ISBN  978-0-521-33535-5 .
MR  0933558 .
^  Borwein, Peter ; Choi, Stephen; Rooney, Brendan; Weirathmueller, Andrea (2008).
The Riemann hypothesis: A resource for the afficionado and virtuoso alike .
CMS Books in Mathematics/Ouvrages de Mathématiques de la SMC.
New York: Springer.
10–11.
doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-72126-2 .
ISBN  978-0-387-72125-5 .
MR  2463715 .
^  Sandifer 2007 , pp.
191–193 .
^  Borwein et al.
2008 , Conjecture 2.7 (the Riemann hypothesis), p.
15 .
^  Patterson 1988 , p.
7.
^ a  b  Borwein et al.
2008 , p.
18.
^  Nathanson 2000 , Chapter 9, The prime number theorem, pp.
289–324 .
^  Zagier, Don (1977).
"The first 50 million prime numbers".
The Mathematical Intelligencer .
1 (S2): 7–19.
doi : 10.1007/bf03351556 .
S2CID  37866599 .
See especially pp.
14–16.
^  Kraft & Washington (2014) , Proposition 5.3 , p.
96.
^  Shahriari, Shahriar (2017).
Algebra in Action: A Course in Groups, Rings, and Fields .
Pure and Applied Undergraduate Texts.
27.
American Mathematical Society.
20–21.
ISBN  978-1-4704-2849-5 .
^  Dudley 1978 , Theorem 3, p.
28 .
^  Shahriari 2017 , pp.
27–28 .
^  Ribenboim 2004 , Fermat's little theorem and primitive roots modulo a prime, pp.
17–21.
^  Ribenboim 2004 , The property of Giuga, pp.
21–22.
^  Ribenboim 2004 , The theorem of Wilson, p.
21.
^ a  b  c  Childress, Nancy (2009).
Class Field Theory .
Universitext.
Springer, New York.
8–11.
doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-72490-4 .
ISBN  978-0-387-72489-8 .
MR  2462595 .
See also p.
64.
^  Erickson, Marty; Vazzana, Anthony; Garth, David (2016).
Introduction to Number Theory .
Textbooks in Mathematics (2nd ed.).
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
p.
200.
ISBN  978-1-4987-1749-6 .
MR  3468748 .
^  Weil, André (1995).
Basic Number Theory .
Classics in Mathematics.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
p.
43 .
ISBN  978-3-540-58655-5 .
MR  1344916 .
Note however that some authors such as Childress (2009) instead use "place" to mean an equivalence class of norms.
^  Koch, H.
(1997).
Algebraic Number Theory .
p.
136.
CiteSeerX  10.1.1.309.8812 .
doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-58095-6 .
ISBN  978-3-540-63003-6 .
MR  1474965 .
^  Lauritzen, Niels (2003).
Concrete Abstract Algebra: From numbers to Gröbner bases .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
p.
127.
doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511804229 .
ISBN  978-0-521-53410-9 .
MR  2014325 .
^  Lauritzen 2003 , Corollary 3.5.14, p.
133; Lemma 3.5.18, p.
136.
^  Kraft & Washington 2014 , Section 12.1, Sums of two squares, pp.
297–301 .
^  Eisenbud, David (1995).
Commutative Algebra .
150.
Section 3.3. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-5350-1 .
ISBN  978-0-387-94268-1 .
MR  1322960 .
^  Shafarevich, Igor R.
(2013).
"Definition of     Spec  ⁡  A    {\displaystyle \operatorname {Spec} A}   " .
Basic Algebraic Geometry 2: Schemes and Complex Manifolds (3rd ed.).
Springer, Heidelberg.
p.
5.
doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-38010-5 .
ISBN  978-3-642-38009-9 .
MR  3100288 .
^  Neukirch, Jürgen (1999).
Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften .
322.
Section I.8, p.
50.
doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-03983-0 .
ISBN  978-3-540-65399-8 .
MR  1697859 .
^  Neukirch 1999 , Section I.7, p.
38   ^  Stevenhagen, P.; Lenstra, H.W.
Jr. (1996).
"Chebotarëv and his density theorem".
18 (2): 26–37.
CiteSeerX  10.1.1.116.9409 .
doi : 10.1007/BF03027290 .
MR  1395088 .
S2CID  14089091 .
^  Hall, Marshall (2018).
The Theory of Groups .
Dover Books on Mathematics.
Courier Dover Publications.
ISBN  978-0-486-81690-6 .
For the Sylow theorems see p.
43; for Lagrange's theorem, see p.
12; for Burnside's theorem see p.
143.
^  Bryant, John; Sangwin, Christopher J.
(2008).
How Round is Your Circle?
: Where Engineering and Mathematics Meet .
p.
178 .
ISBN  978-0-691-13118-4 .
^  Hardy, Godfrey Harold (2012) .
A Mathematician's Apology .
p.
140 .
ISBN  978-0-521-42706-7 .
OCLC  922010634 .
No one has yet discovered any warlike purpose to be served by the theory of numbers or relativity, and it seems unlikely that anyone will do so for many years.
^  Giblin, Peter (1993).
Primes and Programming .
p.
39 .
ISBN  978-0-521-40988-9 .
^  Giblin 1993 , p.
54   ^ a  b  Riesel 1994 , p.
220 .
^  Bullynck, Maarten (2010).
"A history of factor tables with notes on the birth of number theory 1657–1817" .
Revue d'Histoire des Mathématiques .
16 (2): 133–216.
^  Wagstaff, Samuel S.
Jr. (2013).
The Joy of Factoring .
Student mathematical library.
68.
p.
191.
ISBN  978-1-4704-1048-3 .
^  Crandall, Richard ; Pomerance, Carl (2005).
Prime Numbers: A Computational Perspective (2nd ed.).
p.
121.
ISBN  978-0-387-25282-7 .
^  Farach-Colton, Martín ; Tsai, Meng-Tsung (2015).
"On the complexity of computing prime tables".
In Elbassioni, Khaled; Makino, Kazuhisa (eds.).
Algorithms and Computation: 26th International Symposium, ISAAC 2015, Nagoya, Japan, December 9-11, 2015, Proceedings .
Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
9472.
677–688.
arXiv : 1504.05240 .
doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-48971-0_57 .
ISBN  978-3-662-48970-3 .
^  Greaves, George (2013).
Sieves in Number Theory .
Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3.
Folge).
43.
p.
1.
ISBN  978-3-662-04658-6 .
^ a  b  Hromkovič, Juraj (2001).
"5.5 Bibliographic Remarks" .
Algorithmics for Hard Problems .
Texts in Theoretical Computer Science.
An EATCS Series.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
383–385.
doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-04616-6 .
ISBN  978-3-540-66860-2 .
MR  1843669 .
S2CID  31159492 .
^ a  b  Koblitz, Neal (1987).
"Chapter V.
Primality and Factoring".
A Course in Number Theory and Cryptography .
114.
Springer-Verlag, New York.
112–149.
doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-0310-7_5 .
ISBN  978-0-387-96576-5 .
MR  0910297 .
^  Pieprzyk, Josef; Hardjono, Thomas; Seberry, Jennifer (2013).
"2.3.9 Probabilistic Computations" .
Fundamentals of Computer Security .
51–52.
ISBN  978-3-662-07324-7 .
^ a  b  Tao, Terence (2010).
"1.11 The AKS primality test" .
An epsilon of room, II: Pages from year three of a mathematical blog .
Graduate Studies in Mathematics.
117.
82–86.
doi : 10.1090/gsm/117 .
ISBN  978-0-8218-5280-4 .
MR  2780010 .
^ a  b  Atkin, A O.L.
; Morain, F.
(1993).
"Elliptic curves and primality proving"  (PDF) .
61 (203): 29–68.
Bibcode : 1993MaCom..61...29A .
doi : 10.1090/s0025-5718-1993-1199989-x .
JSTOR  2152935 .
MR  1199989 .
^ a  b  Morain, F.
(2007).
"Implementing the asymptotically fast version of the elliptic curve primality proving algorithm".
76 (257): 493–505.
arXiv : math/0502097 .
Bibcode : 2007MaCom..76..493M .
doi : 10.1090/S0025-5718-06-01890-4 .
MR  2261033 .
S2CID  133193 .
^  Lenstra, H.
W.
Jr. ; Pomerance, Carl (2019).
"Primality testing with Gaussian periods"  (PDF) .
Journal of the European Mathematical Society .
21 (4): 1229–1269.
doi : 10.4171/JEMS/861 .
hdl : 21.11116/0000-0005-717D-0 .
MR  3941463 .
S2CID  127807021 .
^  Carl Pomerance ; John L.
Selfridge ; Samuel S.
Wagstaff, Jr. (July 1980).
"The pseudoprimes to 25·10 9 "  (PDF) .
35 (151): 1003–1026.
doi : 10.1090/S0025-5718-1980-0572872-7 .
JSTOR  2006210 .
^  Robert Baillie; Samuel S.
Wagstaff, Jr. (October 1980).
"Lucas Pseudoprimes"  (PDF) .
35 (152): 1391–1417.
doi : 10.1090/S0025-5718-1980-0583518-6 .
JSTOR  2006406 .
MR  0583518 .
^ a  b  Monier, Louis (1980).
"Evaluation and comparison of two efficient probabilistic primality testing algorithms" .
Theoretical Computer Science .
12 (1): 97–108.
doi : 10.1016/0304-3975(80)90007-9 .
MR  0582244 .
^  Tao, Terence (2009).
"1.7 The Lucas–Lehmer test for Mersenne primes" .
Poincaré's legacies, pages from year two of a mathematical blog.
Part I .
36–41.
ISBN  978-0-8218-4883-8 .
MR  2523047 .
^  Kraft & Washington 2014 , p.
41 .
^  For instance see Guy 2013 , A3 Mersenne primes.
Repunits.
Fermat numbers.
Primes of shape     k  ⋅   2   n    +  1    {\displaystyle k\cdot 2^{n}+1}   .
13–21 .
^  "Record 12-Million-Digit Prime Number Nets $100,000 Prize" .
Electronic Frontier Foundation.
October 14, 2009 .
Retrieved 2010-01-04 .
^  "EFF Cooperative Computing Awards" .
2008-02-29 .
^  "PrimeGrid's Seventeen or Bust Subproject"  (PDF) .
Retrieved 2017-01-03 .
^  Caldwell, Chris K.
"The Top Twenty: Largest Known Primes" .
The Prime Pages .
^  Caldwell, Chris K.
"The Top Twenty: Factorial" .
^  Ribenboim 2004 , p.
4.
^  Caldwell, Chris K.
"The Top Twenty: Primorial" .
^  Caldwell, Chris K.
"The Top Twenty: Twin Primes" .
^  Kraft & Washington 2014 , p.
275 .
^  Hoffstein, Jeffrey; Pipher, Jill ; Silverman, Joseph H.
(2014).
An Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography .
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics (2nd ed.).
p.
329.
ISBN  978-1-4939-1711-2 .
^  Pomerance, Carl (1996).
"A tale of two sieves".
43 (12): 1473–1485.
MR  1416721 .
^  Emmanuel Thomé, “795-bit factoring and discrete logarithms,” December 2, 2019.
^  Rieffel, Eleanor G.
; Polak, Wolfgang H.
(2011).
"Chapter 8.
Shor's Algorithm" .
Quantum Computing: A Gentle Introduction .
MIT Press.
163–176.
ISBN  978-0-262-01506-6 .
^  Martín-López, Enrique; Laing, Anthony; Lawson, Thomas; Alvarez, Roberto; Zhou, Xiao-Qi; O'Brien, Jeremy L.
(12 October 2012).
"Experimental realization of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm using qubit recycling".
Nature Photonics .
6 (11): 773–776.
arXiv : 1111.4147 .
Bibcode : 2012NaPho...6..773M .
doi : 10.1038/nphoton.2012.259 .
S2CID  46546101 .
^  Chirgwin, Richard (October 9, 2016).
"Crypto needs more transparency, researchers warn" .
The Register .
^  Hoffstein, Pipher & Silverman 2014 , Section 2.3, Diffie–Hellman key exchange, pp.
65–67.
^  Cormen, Thomas H.
; Leiserson, Charles E.
; Rivest, Ronald L.
; Stein, Clifford (2001) .
"11.3 Universal hashing".
Introduction to Algorithms (2nd ed.).
MIT Press and McGraw-Hill.
232–236.
ISBN  0-262-03293-7 .
For     k    {\displaystyle k}   -independent hashing see problem 11–4, p.
251.
For the credit to Carter and Wegman, see the chapter notes, p.
252.
^  Goodrich, Michael T.
; Tamassia, Roberto (2006).
Data Structures & Algorithms in Java (4th ed.).
ISBN  978-0-471-73884-8 .
See "Quadratic probing", p.
382, and exercise C–9.9, p.
415.
^  Kirtland, Joseph (2001).
Identification Numbers and Check Digit Schemes .
Classroom Resource Materials.
18.
ISBN  978-0-88385-720-5 .
^  Deutsch, P.
(1996).
ZLIB Compressed Data Format Specification version 3.3 .
Request for Comments .
1950.
Network Working Group.
^  Knuth, Donald E.
(1998).
"3.2.1 The linear congruential model".
The Art of Computer Programming, Vol.
2: Seminumerical algorithms (3rd ed.).
10–26.
ISBN  978-0-201-89684-8 .
^  Matsumoto, Makoto; Nishimura, Takuji (1998).
"Mersenne Twister: A 623-dimensionally equidistributed uniform pseudo-random number generator".
ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation .
8 (1): 3–30.
CiteSeerX  10.1.1.215.1141 .
doi : 10.1145/272991.272995 .
S2CID  3332028 .
^  Roth, K.F.
(1951).
"On a problem of Heilbronn".
Journal of the London Mathematical Society .
Second Series.
26 (3): 198–204.
doi : 10.1112/jlms/s1-26.3.198 .
MR  0041889 .
^  Cox, David A.
"Why Eisenstein proved the Eisenstein criterion and why Schönemann discovered it first"  (PDF) .
118 (1): 3–31.
CiteSeerX  10.1.1.398.3440 .
doi : 10.4169/amer.math.monthly.118.01.003 .
S2CID  15978494 .
^  Lang, Serge (2002).
211.
Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag .
doi : 10.1007/978-1-4613-0041-0 .
ISBN  978-0-387-95385-4 .
MR  1878556 .
, Section II.1, p.
90   ^  Schubert, Horst (1949).
"Die eindeutige Zerlegbarkeit eines Knotens in Primknoten".
S.-B Heidelberger Akad.
Wiss.
Math.-Nat.
Kl .
1949 (3): 57–104.
MR  0031733 .
^  Milnor, J.
(1962).
"A unique decomposition theorem for 3-manifolds".
American Journal of Mathematics .
84 (1): 1–7.
doi : 10.2307/2372800 .
JSTOR  2372800 .
MR  0142125 .
^  Boklan & Conway (2017) also include      2   0    +  1  =  2    {\displaystyle 2^{0}+1=2}   , which is not of this form.
^ a  b  Křížek, Michal; Luca, Florian; Somer, Lawrence (2001).
17 Lectures on Fermat Numbers: From Number Theory to Geometry .
CMS Books in Mathematics.
9.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
1–2.
doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-21850-2 .
ISBN  978-0-387-95332-8 .
MR  1866957 .
^  Boklan, Kent D.; Conway, John H.
(January 2017).
"Expect at most one billionth of a new Ferma t prime!".
39 (1): 3–5.
arXiv : 1605.01371 .
doi : 10.1007/s00283-016-9644-3 .
S2CID  119165671 .
^  Gleason, Andrew M.
(1988).
"Angle trisection, the heptagon, and the triskaidecagon".
95 (3): 185–194.
doi : 10.2307/2323624 .
JSTOR  2323624 .
MR  0935432 .
^  Ziegler, Günter M.
(2015).
"Cannons at sparrows".
European Mathematical Society Newsletter (95): 25–31.
MR  3330472 .
^  Peterson, Ivars (June 28, 1999).
"The Return of Zeta" .
MAA Online .
Archived from the original on October 20, 2007 .
Retrieved 2008-03-14 .
^  Hayes, Brian (2003).
"Computing science: The spectrum of Riemannium".
American Scientist .
91 (4): 296–300.
doi : 10.1511/2003.26.3349 .
JSTOR  27858239 .
S2CID  16785858 .
^  Bengtsson, Ingemar; Życzkowski, Karol (2017).
Geometry of quantum states : an introduction to quantum entanglement (Second ed.).
313–354.
ISBN  978-1-107-02625-4 .
OCLC  967938939 .
^  Zhu, Huangjun (2010).
"SIC POVMs and Clifford groups in prime dimensions" .
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical .
43 (30): 305305.
arXiv : 1003.3591 .
Bibcode : 2010JPhA...43D5305Z .
doi : 10.1088/1751-8113/43/30/305305 .
S2CID  118363843 .
^  Goles, E.; Schulz, O.; Markus, M.
(2001).
"Prime number selection of cycles in a predator-prey model".
Complexity .
6 (4): 33–38.
Bibcode : 2001Cmplx...6d..33G .
doi : 10.1002/cplx.1040 .
^  Campos, Paulo R.A.; de Oliveira, Viviane M.; Giro, Ronaldo; Galvão, Douglas S.
(2004).
"Emergence of prime numbers as the result of evolutionary strategy".
Physical Review Letters .
93 (9): 098107.
arXiv : q-bio/0406017 .
Bibcode : 2004PhRvL..93i8107C .
doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.098107 .
PMID  15447148 .
S2CID  88332 .
^  "Invasion of the Brood" .
The Economist .
May 6, 2004 .
Retrieved 2006-11-26 .
^  Zimmer, Carl (May 15, 2015).
"Bamboo Mathematicians" .
Phenomena: The Loom.
National Geographic .
Retrieved February 22, 2018 .
^  Hill, Peter Jensen, ed.
(1995).
The Messiaen companion .
Portland, OR: Amadeus Press.
Ex.
13.2 Messe de la Pentecôte 1 'Entrée'.
ISBN  978-0-931340-95-6 .
^  Pomerance, Carl (2004).
"Prime Numbers and the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence"  (PDF) .
In Hayes, David F.; Ross, Peter (eds.).
Mathematical Adventures for Students and Amateurs .
Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
3–6.
ISBN  978-0-88385-548-5 .
MR  2085842 .
^  GrrlScientist (September 16, 2010).
"The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time" .
Science.
The Guardian .
Retrieved February 22, 2010 .
^  Schillinger, Liesl (April 9, 2010).
"Counting on Each Other" .
Sunday Book Review.
The New York Times .
External links   Prime number at Wikipedia's sister projects   Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity  "Prime number" .
Encyclopedia of Mathematics .
EMS Press .
2001 .
Caldwell, Chris, The Prime Pages at primes.utm.edu .
Prime Numbers on In Our Time at the BBC  Plus teacher and student package: prime numbers from Plus, the free online mathematics magazine produced by the Millennium Mathematics Project at the University of Cambridge.
Generators and calculators Prime factors calculator can factorize any positive integer up to 20 digits.
Fast Online primality test with factorization makes use of the Elliptic Curve Method (up to thousand-digits numbers, requires Java).
Huge database of prime numbers  Prime Numbers up to 1 trillion  Archived 2021-02-27 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases  International  FAST  National  France  BnF data  Germany  Israel  United States  Latvia  Japan  Czech Republic  v t e Number theory Fields  Algebraic number theory ( class field theory , non-abelian class field theory , Iwasawa theory , Iwasawa–Tate theory , Kummer theory )  Analytic number theory ( analytic theory of L-functions , probabilistic number theory , sieve theory )  Geometric number theory  Computational number theory  Transcendental number theory  Diophantine geometry ( Arakelov theory , Hodge–Arakelov theory )  Arithmetic combinatorics ( additive number theory )  Arithmetic geometry ( anabelian geometry , P-adic Hodge theory )  Arithmetic topology  Arithmetic dynamics  Key concepts  Numbers  0  Natural numbers  Unity  Prime numbers  Composite numbers  Rational numbers  Irrational numbers  Algebraic numbers  Transcendental numbers  P-adic numbers ( P-adic analysis )  Arithmetic  Modular arithmetic  Chinese remainder theorem  Arithmetic functions  Advanced concepts  Quadratic forms  Modular forms  L-functions  Diophantine equations  Diophantine approximation  Continued fractions    Category   List of topics   List of recreational topics   Wikibook   Wikiversity  v t e Divisibility-based sets of integers Overview  Integer factorization  Divisor  Unitary divisor  Divisor function  Prime factor  Fundamental theorem of arithmetic  Factorization forms  Prime  Composite  Semiprime  Pronic  Sphenic  Square-free  Powerful  Perfect power  Achilles  Smooth  Regular  Rough  Unusual  Constrained divisor sums  Perfect  Almost perfect  Quasiperfect  Multiply perfect  Hemiperfect  Hyperperfect  Superperfect  Unitary perfect  Semiperfect  Practical  Erdős–Nicolas  With many divisors  Abundant  Primitive abundant  Highly abundant  Superabundant  Colossally abundant  Highly composite  Superior highly composite  Weird  Aliquot sequence -related  Untouchable  Amicable ( Triple )  Sociable  Betrothed  Base -dependent  Equidigital  Extravagant  Frugal  Harshad  Polydivisible  Smith  Other sets  Arithmetic  Deficient  Friendly  Solitary  Sublime  Harmonic divisor  Descartes  Refactorable  Superperfect  v t e Prime number classes By formula  Fermat ( 2 2 n + 1 )  Mersenne ( 2 p − 1 )  Double Mersenne ( 2 2 p −1 − 1 )  Wagstaff (2 p + 1)/3  Proth ( k ·2 n + 1 )  Factorial ( n !
± 1 )  Primorial ( p n # ± 1 )  Euclid ( p n # + 1 )  Pythagorean ( 4 n + 1 )  Pierpont ( 2 m ·3 n + 1 )  Quartan ( x 4 + y 4 )  Solinas ( 2 m ± 2 n ± 1 )  Cullen ( n ·2 n + 1 )  Woodall ( n ·2 n − 1 )  Cuban ( x 3 − y 3 )/( x − y )  Leyland ( x y + y x )  Thabit ( 3·2 n − 1 )  Williams ( ( b −1)· b n − 1 )  Mills ( ⌊ A 3 n ⌋ )  By integer sequence  Fibonacci  Lucas  Pell  Newman–Shanks–Williams  Perrin  By property  Wieferich ( pair )  Wall–Sun–Sun  Wolstenholme  Wilson  Lucky  Fortunate  Ramanujan  Pillai  Regular  Strong  Stern  Supersingular (elliptic curve)  Supersingular (moonshine theory)  Good  Super  Higgs  Highly cototient  Unique  Base -dependent  Palindromic  Emirp  Repunit (10 n − 1)/9  Permutable  Circular  Truncatable  Minimal  Delicate  Primeval  Full reptend  Unique  Happy  Self  Smarandache–Wellin  Strobogrammatic  Dihedral  Tetradic  Patterns  Twin ( p , p + 2 )  Bi-twin chain ( n ± 1, 2 n ± 1, 4 n ± 1, … )  Triplet ( p , p + 2 or p + 4, p + 6 )  Quadruplet ( p , p + 2, p + 6, p + 8 )  k -tuple  Cousin ( p , p + 4 )  Sexy ( p , p + 6 )  Chen  Sophie Germain/Safe ( p , 2 p + 1 )  Cunningham ( p , 2 p ± 1, 4 p ± 3, 8 p ± 7, ...
)  Arithmetic progression ( p + a·n , n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
)  Balanced ( consecutive p − n , p , p + n )  By size  Mega (1,000,000+ digits)  Largest known  list  Complex numbers  Eisenstein prime  Gaussian prime  Composite numbers  Pseudoprime  Catalan  Elliptic  Euler  Euler–Jacobi  Fermat  Frobenius  Lucas  Perrin  Somer–Lucas  Strong  Carmichael number  Almost prime  Semiprime  Sphenic number  Interprime  Pernicious  Related topics  Probable prime  Industrial-grade prime  Illegal prime  Formula for primes  Prime gap  First 60 primes  2  3  5  7  11  13  17  19  23  29  31  37  41  43  47  53  59  61  67  71  73  79  83  89  97  101  103  107  109  113  127  131  137  139  149  151  157  163  167  173  179  181  191  193  197  199  211  223  227  229  233  239  241  251  257  263  269  271  277  281  List of prime numbers v t e Classes of natural numbers Powers and related numbers  Achilles  Power of 2  Power of 3  Power of 10  Square  Cube  Fourth power  Fifth power  Sixth power  Seventh power  Eighth power  Perfect power  Powerful  Prime power  Of the form a × 2 b ± 1  Cullen  Double Mersenne  Fermat  Mersenne  Proth  Thabit  Woodall  Other polynomial numbers  Hilbert  Idoneal  Leyland  Loeschian  Lucky numbers of Euler  Recursively defined numbers  Fibonacci  Jacobsthal  Leonardo  Lucas  Narayana  Padovan  Pell  Perrin  Possessing a specific set of other numbers  Amenable  Congruent  Knödel  Riesel  Sierpiński  Expressible via specific sums  Nonhypotenuse  Polite  Practical  Primary pseudoperfect  Ulam  Wolstenholme  Figurate numbers 2-dimensional centered  Centered triangular  Centered square  Centered pentagonal  Centered hexagonal  Centered heptagonal  Centered octagonal  Centered nonagonal  Centered decagonal  Star  non-centered  Triangular  Square  Square triangular  Pentagonal  Hexagonal  Heptagonal  Octagonal  Nonagonal  Decagonal  Dodecagonal  3-dimensional centered  Centered tetrahedral  Centered cube  Centered octahedral  Centered dodecahedral  Centered icosahedral  non-centered  Tetrahedral  Cubic  Octahedral  Dodecahedral  Icosahedral  Stella octangula  pyramidal  Square pyramidal  4-dimensional non-centered  Pentatope  Squared triangular  Tesseractic  Combinatorial numbers  Bell  Cake  Catalan  Dedekind  Delannoy  Euler  Eulerian  Fuss–Catalan  Lah  Lazy caterer's sequence  Lobb  Motzkin  Narayana  Ordered Bell  Schröder  Schröder–Hipparchus  Stirling first  Stirling second  Telephone number  Wedderburn–Etherington  Primes  Wieferich  Wall–Sun–Sun  Wolstenholme prime  Wilson  Pseudoprimes  Carmichael number  Catalan pseudoprime  Elliptic pseudoprime  Euler pseudoprime  Euler–Jacobi pseudoprime  Fermat pseudoprime  Frobenius pseudoprime  Lucas pseudoprime  Lucas–Carmichael number  Perrin pseudoprime  Somer–Lucas pseudoprime  Strong pseudoprime  Arithmetic functions and dynamics Divisor functions  Abundant  Almost perfect  Arithmetic  Betrothed  Colossally abundant  Deficient  Descartes  Hemiperfect  Highly abundant  Highly composite  Hyperperfect  Multiply perfect  Perfect  Practical  Primitive abundant  Quasiperfect  Refactorable  Semiperfect  Sublime  Superabundant  Superior highly composite  Superperfect  Prime omega functions  Almost prime  Semiprime  Euler's totient function  Highly cototient  Highly totient  Noncototient  Nontotient  Perfect totient  Sparsely totient  Aliquot sequences  Amicable  Perfect  Sociable  Untouchable  Primorial  Euclid  Fortunate  Other prime factor or divisor related numbers  Blum  Cyclic  Erdős–Nicolas  Erdős–Woods  Friendly  Giuga  Harmonic divisor  Jordan–Pólya  Lucas–Carmichael  Pronic  Regular  Rough  Smooth  Sphenic  Størmer  Super-Poulet  Zeisel  Numeral system -dependent numbers Arithmetic functions  and dynamics  Persistence  Additive  Multiplicative  Digit sum  Digit sum  Digital root  Self  Sum-product  Digit product  Multiplicative digital root  Sum-product  Coding-related  Meertens  Other  Dudeney  Factorion  Kaprekar  Kaprekar's constant  Keith  Lychrel  Narcissistic  Perfect digit-to-digit invariant  Perfect digital invariant  Happy   P-adic numbers -related  Automorphic  Trimorphic  Digit -composition related  Palindromic  Pandigital  Repdigit  Repunit  Self-descriptive  Smarandache–Wellin  Undulating  Digit- permutation related  Cyclic  Digit-reassembly  Parasitic  Primeval  Transposable  Divisor-related  Equidigital  Extravagant  Frugal  Harshad  Polydivisible  Smith  Vampire  Other  Friedman  Binary numbers  Evil  Odious  Pernicious  Generated via a sieve  Lucky  Prime  Sorting related  Pancake number  Sorting number  Natural language related  Aronson's sequence  Ban  Graphemics related  Strobogrammatic    Mathematics portal  Portals :  Mathematics  Science  History of science  Arithmetic  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prime_number&oldid=1218686584 "Overview of the role of mathematics in the Golden Age of Islam  A page from The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing by Al-Khwarizmi  Mathematics during the Golden Age of Islam , especially during the 9th and 10th centuries, was built on Greek mathematics ( Euclid , Archimedes , Apollonius ) and Indian mathematics ( Aryabhata , Brahmagupta ).
Important progress was made, such as full development of the decimal place-value system to include decimal fractions , the first systematised study of algebra , and advances in geometry and trigonometry .
The medieval Islamic world underwent significant developments in mathematics.
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwārizmī played a key role in this transformation, introducing algebra as a distinct field in the 9th century.
Al-Khwārizmī 's approach, departing from earlier arithmetical traditions, laid the groundwork for the arithmetization of algebra , influencing mathematical thought for an extended period.
Successors like al-Karaji expanded on his work, contributing to advancements in various mathematical domains.
The practicality and broad applicability of these mathematical methods facilitated the dissemination of Arabic mathematics to the West, contributing substantially to the evolution of Western mathematics.
Arabic mathematical knowledge spread through various channels during the medieval era , driven by the practical applications of al-Khwārizmī 's methods.
This dissemination was influenced not only by economic and political factors but also by cultural exchanges, exemplified by events such as the Crusades and the translation movement.
The Islamic Golden Age , spanning from the 8th to the 14th century, marked a period of considerable advancements in various scientific disciplines, attracting scholars from medieval Europe seeking access to this knowledge.
Trade routes and cultural interactions played a crucial role in introducing Arabic mathematical ideas to the West.
The translation of Arabic mathematical texts, along with Greek and Roman works, during the 14th to 17th century, played a pivotal role in shaping the intellectual landscape of the Renaissance .
Origin and spread of Arab-Islamic mathematics   Arabic mathematics, particularly algebra, developed significantly during the medieval period .
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwārizmī 's ( Arabic : محمد بن موسى الخوارزمي ; c.
780 – c.
850 ) work between AD 813 and 833 in Baghdad was a turning point.
He introduced the term "algebra" in the title of his book, " Kitab al-jabr wa al-muqabala ," marking it as a distinct discipline.
He regarded his work as "a short work on Calculation by (the rules of) Completion and Reduction, confining it to what is easiest and most useful in arithmetic".
Later, people commented his work was not just a theoretical treatise but also practical, aimed at solving problems in areas like commerce and land measurement.
Al-Khwārizmī 's approach was groundbreaking in that it did not arise from any previous "arithmetical" tradition, including that of Diophantus .
He developed a new vocabulary for algebra, distinguishing between purely algebraic terms and those shared with arithmetic.
Al-Khwārizmī noticed that the representation of numbers is crucial in daily life.
Thus, he wanted to find or summarize a way to simplify the mathematical operation, so-called later, the algebra.
His algebra was initially focused on linear and quadratic equations and the elementary arithmetic of binomials and trinomials.
This approach, which involved solving equations using radicals and related algebraic calculations, influenced mathematical thinking long after his death.
Al-Khwārizmī's proof of the rule for solving quadratic equations of the form (ax^2 + bx = c), commonly referred to as "squares plus roots equal numbers," was a monumental achievement in the history of algebra.
This breakthrough laid the groundwork for the systematic approach to solving quadratic equations, which became a fundamental aspect of algebra as it developed in the Western world.
Al-Khwārizmī's method, which involved completing the square, not only provided a practical solution for equations of this type but also introduced an abstract and generalized approach to mathematical problems.
His work, encapsulated in his seminal text "Al-Kitab al-Mukhtasar fi Hisab al-Jabr wal-Muqabala" (The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing), was translated into Latin in the 12th century.
This translation played a pivotal role in the transmission of algebraic knowledge to Europe, significantly influencing mathematicians during the Renaissance and shaping the evolution of modern mathematics.
Al-Khwārizmī's contributions, especially his proof for quadratic equations, are a testament to the rich mathematical heritage of the Islamic world and its enduring impact on Western mathematics.
The spread of Arabic mathematics to the West was facilitated by several factors.
The practicality and general applicability of al-Khwārizmī's methods were significant.
They were designed to convert numerical or geometrical problems into equations in normal form, leading to canonical solution formulae.
His work and that of his successors like al-Karaji laid the foundation for advances in various mathematical fields, including number theory , numerical analysis , and rational Diophantine analysis .
Al-Khwārizmī's algebra was an autonomous discipline with its historical perspective, eventually leading to the "arithmetization of algebra".
His successors expanded on his work, adapting it to new theoretical and technical challenges and reorienting it towards a more arithmetical direction for abstract algebraic calculation.
Arabic mathematics, epitomized by al-Khwārizmī's work, was crucial in shaping the mathematical landscape.
Its spread to the West was driven by its practical applications, the expansion of mathematical concepts by his successors, and the translation and adaptation of these ideas into the Western context.
This spread was a complex process involving economics, politics, and cultural exchange, greatly influencing Western mathematics.
The period known as the Islamic Golden Age (8th to 14th century) was characterized by significant advancements in various fields, including mathematics .
Scholars in the Islamic world made substantial contributions to mathematics , astronomy , medicine , and other sciences .
As a result, the intellectual achievements of Islamic scholars attracted the attention of scholars in medieval Europe who sought to access this wealth of knowledge.
Trade routes, such as the Silk Road , facilitated the movement of goods, ideas, and knowledge between the East and West.
Cities like Baghdad , Cairo , and Cordoba became centers of learning and attracted scholars from different cultural backgrounds.Therefore, mathematical knowledge from the Islamic world found its way to Europe through various channels.
Meanwhile, the Crusades connected Western Europeans with the Islamic world.
While the primary purpose of the Crusades was military, there was also cultural exchange and exposure to Islamic knowledge, including mathematics.
European scholars who traveled to the Holy Land and other parts of the Islamic world gained access to Arabic manuscripts and mathematical treatises.
During the 14th to 17th century, the translation of Arabic mathematical texts, along with Greek and Roman ones, played a crucial role in shaping the intellectual landscape of the Renaissance.
Figures like Fibonacci , who studied in North Africa and the Middle East, helped introduce and popularize Arabic numerals and mathematical concepts in Europe.
Concepts   Omar Khayyám 's "Cubic equations and intersections of conic sections" the first page of the two-chaptered manuscript kept in Tehran University  Algebra   Further information: History of algebra  The study of algebra , the name of which is derived from the Arabic word meaning completion or "reunion of broken parts",  flourished during the Islamic golden age .
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi , a Persian scholar in the House of Wisdom in Baghdad was the founder of algebra, is along with the Greek mathematician Diophantus , known as the father of algebra.
In his book The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing , Al-Khwarizmi deals with ways to solve for the positive  roots of first and second-degree (linear and quadratic) polynomial equations .
He introduces the method of reduction , and unlike Diophantus, also gives general solutions for the equations he deals with.
Al-Khwarizmi's algebra was rhetorical, which means that the equations were written out in full sentences.
This was unlike the algebraic work of Diophantus, which was syncopated, meaning that some symbolism is used.
The transition to symbolic algebra, where only symbols are used, can be seen in the work of Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi and Abū al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī al-Qalaṣādī .
On the work done by Al-Khwarizmi, J.
J.
O'Connor and Edmund F.
Robertson said:    "Perhaps one of the most significant advances made by Arabic mathematics began at this time with the work of al-Khwarizmi, namely the beginnings of algebra.
It is important to understand just how significant this new idea was.
It was a revolutionary move away from the Greek concept of mathematics which was essentially geometry.
Algebra was a unifying theory which allowed rational numbers , irrational numbers , geometrical magnitudes, etc., to all be treated as "algebraic objects".
It gave mathematics a whole new development path so much broader in concept to that which had existed before, and provided a vehicle for the future development of the subject.
Another important aspect of the introduction of algebraic ideas was that it allowed mathematics to be applied to itself in a way which had not happened before."
— MacTutor History of Mathematics archive  Several other mathematicians during this time period expanded on the algebra of Al-Khwarizmi.
Abu Kamil Shuja' wrote a book of algebra accompanied with geometrical illustrations and proofs.
He also enumerated all the possible solutions to some of his problems.
Abu al-Jud , Omar Khayyam , along with Sharaf al-Dīn al-Tūsī , found several solutions of the cubic equation .
Omar Khayyam found the general geometric solution of a cubic equation.
Cubic equations   To solve the third-degree equation x 3 + a 2 x = b Khayyám constructed the parabola  x 2 = ay , a circle with diameter b / a 2 , and a vertical line through the intersection point.
The solution is given by the length of the horizontal line segment from the origin to the intersection of the vertical line and the x -axis.
Further information: Cubic equation  Omar Khayyam (c.
1038/48 in Iran – 1123/24)  wrote the Treatise on Demonstration of Problems of Algebra containing the systematic solution of cubic or third-order equations , going beyond the Algebra of al-Khwārizmī.
Khayyám obtained the solutions of these equations by finding the intersection points of two conic sections .
This method had been used by the Greeks,  but they did not generalize the method to cover all equations with positive roots .
Sharaf al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī (?
in Tus, Iran – 1213/4) developed a novel approach to the investigation of cubic equations—an approach which entailed finding the point at which a cubic polynomial obtains its maximum value.
For example, to solve the equation        x   3    +  a  =  b  x    {\displaystyle \ x^{3}+a=bx}   , with a and b positive, he would note that the maximum point of the curve       y  =  b  x  −   x   3      {\displaystyle \ y=bx-x^{3}}   occurs at     x  =      b  3        {\displaystyle x=\textstyle {\sqrt {\frac {b}{3}}}}   , and that the equation would have no solutions, one solution or two solutions, depending on whether the height of the curve at that point was less than, equal to, or greater than a .
His surviving works give no indication of how he discovered his formulae for the maxima of these curves.
Various conjectures have been proposed to account for his discovery of them.
Part of a series on Islamic studies  History Philosophy Theology  Early historiography  Early social changes  Early / Modern philosophy  Eschatology Concept of God  Tawhid  (Islamic monotheism)  Mysticism (Sufism)   Jurisprudence  Criminal  Economic  Etiquettical  Hygienical  Marital  Military  Political  Theological   Science in medieval times  Astronomy  Inventions  Mathematics  Medicine ( Ophthalmology )   Arts  Astrology  Architecture  Calligraphy  Literature  Classical Arabic Poetry  Music  Pottery  Other topics  Islamization of knowledge  v t e  Induction   See also: Mathematical induction § History  The earliest implicit traces of mathematical induction can be found in Euclid 's proof that the number of primes is infinite (c.
300 BCE).
The first explicit formulation of the principle of induction was given by Pascal in his Traité du triangle arithmétique (1665).
In between, implicit proof by induction for arithmetic sequences was introduced by al-Karaji (c.
1000) and continued by al-Samaw'al , who used it for special cases of the binomial theorem and properties of Pascal's triangle .
Irrational numbers   The Greeks had discovered irrational numbers , but were not happy with them and only able to cope by drawing a distinction between magnitude and number .
In the Greek view, magnitudes varied continuously and could be used for entities such as line segments, whereas numbers were discrete.
Hence, irrationals could only be handled geometrically; and indeed Greek mathematics was mainly geometrical.
Islamic mathematicians including Abū Kāmil Shujāʿ ibn Aslam and Ibn Tahir al-Baghdadi slowly removed the distinction between magnitude and number, allowing irrational quantities to appear as coefficients in equations and to be solutions of algebraic equations.
They worked freely with irrationals as mathematical objects, but they did not examine closely their nature.
In the twelfth century, Latin translations of Al-Khwarizmi 's Arithmetic on the Indian numerals introduced the decimal  positional number system to the Western world .
His Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing presented the first systematic solution of linear and quadratic equations .
In Renaissance Europe, he was considered the original inventor of algebra, although it is now known that his work is based on older Indian or Greek sources.
He revised Ptolemy 's Geography and wrote on astronomy and astrology.
However, C.A.
Nallino suggests that al-Khwarizmi's original work was not based on Ptolemy but on a derivative world map,  presumably in Syriac or Arabic .
Spherical trigonometry   Further information: Law of sines and History of trigonometry  The spherical law of sines was discovered in the 10th century: it has been attributed variously to Abu-Mahmud Khojandi , Nasir al-Din al-Tusi and Abu Nasr Mansur , with Abu al-Wafa' Buzjani as a contributor.
Ibn Muʿādh al-Jayyānī 's The book of unknown arcs of a sphere in the 11th century introduced the general law of sines.
The plane law of sines was described in the 13th century by Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī .
In his On the Sector Figure , he stated the law of sines for plane and spherical triangles and provided proofs for this law.
Negative numbers   Further information: Negative numbers  In the 9th century, Islamic mathematicians were familiar with negative numbers from the works of Indian mathematicians, but the recognition and use of negative numbers during this period remained timid.
Al-Khwarizmi did not use negative numbers or negative coefficients.
But within fifty years, Abu Kamil illustrated the rules of signs for expanding the multiplication     (  a  ±  b  )  (  c  ±  d  )    {\displaystyle (a\pm b)(c\pm d)}   .
Al-Karaji wrote in his book al-Fakhrī that "negative quantities must be counted as terms".
In the 10th century, Abū al-Wafā' al-Būzjānī considered debts as negative numbers in A Book on What Is Necessary from the Science of Arithmetic for Scribes and Businessmen .
By the 12th century, al-Karaji's successors were to state the general rules of signs and use them to solve polynomial divisions .
As al-Samaw'al writes:  the product of a negative number— al-nāqiṣ —by a positive number— al-zāʾid —is negative, and by a negative number is positive.
If we subtract a negative number from a higher negative number, the remainder is their negative difference.
The difference remains positive if we subtract a negative number from a lower negative number.
If we subtract a negative number from a positive number, the remainder is their positive sum.
If we subtract a positive number from an empty power ( martaba khāliyya ), the remainder is the same negative, and if we subtract a negative number from an empty power, the remainder is the same positive number.
Double false position   Further information: False position method  Between the 9th and 10th centuries, the Egyptian mathematician Abu Kamil wrote a now-lost treatise on the use of double false position, known as the Book of the Two Errors ( Kitāb al-khaṭāʾayn ).
The oldest surviving writing on double false position from the Middle East is that of Qusta ibn Luqa (10th century), an Arab mathematician from Baalbek , Lebanon .
He justified the technique by a formal, Euclidean-style geometric proof .
Within the tradition of Golden Age Muslim mathematics, double false position was known as hisāb al-khaṭāʾayn ("reckoning by two errors").
It was used for centuries to solve practical problems such as commercial and juridical questions (estate partitions according to rules of Quranic inheritance ), as well as purely recreational problems.
The algorithm was often memorized with the aid of mnemonics , such as a verse attributed to Ibn al-Yasamin and balance-scale diagrams explained by al-Hassar and Ibn al-Banna , who were each mathematicians of Moroccan origin.
Influences   The influence of medieval Arab-Islamic mathematics to the rest of the world is wide and profound, in both the realm of science and mathematics.
The knowledge of the Arabs went into the western world through Spain and Sicily during the translation movement.
"The Moors (western Mohammedans from that part of North Africa once known as Mauritania) crossed over into Spain early in the seventh century, bringing with them the cultural resources of the Arab world".
In the 13th century, King Alfonso X of Castile established the Toledo School of Translators , in the Kingdom of Castile , where scholars translated numerous scientific and philosophical works from Arabic into Latin .
The translations included Islamic contributions to trigonometry , which helps European mathematicians and astronomers in their studies.
European scholars such as Gerard of Cremona (1114–1187) played a key role in translating and disseminating these works, thus making them accessible to a wider audience.
Cremona is said to have translated into Latin "no fewer than 90 complete Arabic texts."
European mathematicians, building on the foundations laid by Islamic scholars, further developed practical trigonometry for applications in navigation, cartography, and celestial navigation, thus pushing forward the age of discovery and scientific revolution.
The practical applications of trigonometry for navigation and astronomy became increasingly important during the Age of Exploration.
Al-Battānī is one of the islamic mathematicians who made great contributions to the development of trigonometry.
He "innovated new trigonometric functions, created a table of cotangents, and made some formulas in spherical trigonometry."
These discoveries, together with his astronomical works which are praised for their accuracy, greatly advanced astronomical calculations and instruments.
Al-Khayyām (1048–1131) was a Persian mathematician, astronomer, and poet, known for his work on algebra and geometry, particularly his investigations into the solutions of cubic equations.
He was "the first in history to elaborate a geometrical theory of equations with degrees ≤ 3",  and has great influence on the work of Descartes, a French mathematician who is often regarded as the founder of analytical geometry.
Indeed, "to read Descartes ' s Géométrie is to look upstream towards al-Khayyām and al-Ṭūsī; and downstream towards Newton, Leibniz, Cramer, Bézout and the Bernoulli brothers".
Numerous problems that appear in "La Géométrie" (Geometry) have foundations that date back to al-Khayyām.
Abū Kāmil (Arabic: أبو كامل شجاع بن أسلم بن محمد بن شجاع , also known as Al-ḥāsib al-miṣrī—lit.
"The Egyptian Calculator") (c.
850 – c.
930), was studied algebra following the author of Algebra , al-Khwārizmī.
His Book of Algebra (Kitāb fī al-jabr wa al-muqābala) is "essentially a commentary on and elaboration of al-Khwārizmī's work; in part for that reason and in part for its own merit, the book enjoyed widespread popularity in the Muslim world".
It contains 69 problems, which is more than al-Khwārizmī who had 40 in his book.
Abū Kāmil's Algebra plays a significant role in shaping the trajectory of Western mathematics, particularly in its impact on the works of the Italian mathematician Leonardo of Pisa, widely recognized as Fibonacci.
In his Liber Abaci (1202), Fibonacci extensively incorporated ideas from Arabic mathematicians, using approximately 29 problems from Book of Algebra with scarce modification.
Western historians' perception of the contribution of Arab mathematicians   Despite the fundamental works Arabic mathematicians have done on the development of Algebra and algebraic geometry, Western historians in the 18th and early 19th century still regarded it as a fact that Classical science and math were unique phenomena of the West.
Even though some math contributions from Arab mathematicians are occasionally acknowledged, they are considered to be "outside history or only integrated in so far as it contributed to science, which is essentially European",  and just some technical innovations to the Greek heritage rather than open up a completely new branch of mathematics.
In the French philosopher Ernest Renan 's work, Arabic math is merely "a reflection of Greece , combined with Persian and Indian influences".
And according to Duhem , "Arabic science only reproduced the teachings received from Greek science".
Besides being considered as merely some insignificant additions or reflections to the great tradition of Greek classical science, math works from Arabic mathematicians are also blamed for lacking rigor and too focused on practical applications and calculations, and this is why Western historians argued they could never reach the level of Greek mathematicians.
As Tannery wrote, Arabic math "in no way superseded the level attained by Diophantus".
On the other hand, they perceived that Western mathematicians went into a very different way both in its method employed and ultimate purpose, "the hallmark of Western science in its Greek origins as well as in its modern renaissance, is its conformity to rigorous standards".
Thus, the perceived non-rigorous proof in Arabic mathematicians' book authorizes Bourbaki to exclude the Arabic period when he retraced the evolution of algebra.
And instead, the history of classical algebra is written as the work of the Renaissance and the origin of algebraic geometry is traced back to Descartes, while Arabic mathematicians' contributions are ignored deliberately.
In Rashed's words: "To justify the exclusion of science written in Arabic from the history of science, one invokes its absence of rigor, its calculatory appearance and its practical aims.
Furthermore, strictly dependent on Greek science and, lastly, incapable of introducing experimental norms, scientists of that time were relegated to the role of conscientious guardians of the Hellenistic museum."
In 18th century Germany and France , the prevailing Orientalist view was "East and West oppose each other not as geographical but as historical positivities",  which labeled " Rationalism " as the essence of the West, while the "Call of the Orient " movement emerged in the 19th century was interpreted as "against Rationalism"  and a return to a more "spiritual and harmonious" lifestyle.
Thus, the prevailing Orientalism in that period was one of the main reasons why Arabic mathematicians were often ignored for their contributions, as people outside the West were considered to be lacking the necessary rationality and scientific spirit to made significant contributions to math and science.
Conclusion   The medieval Arab-Islamic world played a crucial role in shaping the trajectory of mathematics, with al-Khwārizmī 's algebraic innovations serving as a cornerstone.
The dissemination of Arabic mathematics to the West during the Islamic Golden Age , facilitated by cultural exchanges and translations, left a lasting impact on Western mathematical thought.
Mathematicians like Al-Battānī , Al-Khayyām , and Abū Kāmil , with their contributions to trigonometry , algebra , and geometry , extended their influence beyond their time.
Despite the foundational contributions of Arab mathematicians, Western historians in the 18th and early 19th centuries, influenced by Orientalist views, sometimes marginalized these achievements.
The East lacking rationality and scientific spirit perpetuated a biased perspective, hindering the recognition of the significant role played by Arabic mathematics in the development of algebra and other mathematical disciplines.
Reevaluating the history of mathematics necessitates acknowledging the interconnectedness of diverse mathematical traditions and dispelling the notion of a uniquely European mathematical heritage.
The contributions of Arab mathematicians, marked by practical applications and theoretical innovations, form an integral part of the rich tapestry of mathematical history, and deserves recognition.
Other major figures   Sally P.
Ragep, a historian of science in Islam, estimated in 2019 that "tens of thousands" of Arabic manuscripts in mathematical sciences and philosophy remain unread, which give studies which "reflect individual biases and a limited focus on a relatively few texts and scholars".
'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk (fl.
830) (quadratics)  Sind ibn Ali (d.
after 864)  Thabit ibn Qurra (826–901)  Al-Battānī (before 858 – 929)  Abū Kāmil (c.
850 – c.
930)  Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi (fl.
952) (arithmetic)  'Abd al-'Aziz al-Qabisi (d.
967)  Abū Sahl al-Qūhī (c.
940–1000) (centres of gravity)  Ibn al-Haytham (c.
965–1040)  Abū al-Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī (973–1048) (trigonometry)  Al-Khayyām (1048–1131)  Ibn Maḍāʾ (c.
1116–1196)  Ismail al-Jazari (1136–1206)  Jamshīd al-Kāshī (c.
1380–1429) (decimals and estimation of the circle constant)  Gallery      Engraving of Abū Sahl al-Qūhī 's perfect compass to draw conic sections     The theorem of Ibn Haytham   Citizens or residents of Iraq  This article needs additional citations for verification .
Find sources:  "Iraqis" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )    Iraqis العراقيون Map of the Iraqi diaspora in the world including descendants Total population 50+ million worldwide Regions with significant populations  Iraq 45,000,000   Iran 500,000   Israel 450,000    Germany 321,000   United Kingdom 400,000 - 850,000   United States 350,000 to 450,000    United Arab Emirates 250,000   Sweden 145,586   Jordan 131,000   Turkey 115,000   Australia 80,000–130,000    Netherlands 85,000  Lebanon 50,000   Canada 49,680   Finland 26,653   Austria 13,000+   Greece 8,000   More countries Languages Mesopotamian Arabic ( Semitic ): 100% (as the official formal language spoken by Iraqis) and native only language spoken to 65–70%; Neo-Aramaic languages ( Semitic ): 10%; Kurdish languages (Zagroz languages): 20%; Iraqi Turkmen Turkish ( Turkic ): 7–13%;  Other indigenous Mesopotamian languages ; 1% Including: Hebrew , Judeo-Iraqi Arabic , Mandaic , Armenian ( diasporic ), Shabaki , Domari and others Religion Predominantly Islam ( Shia and Sunni ) Smaller Minorities Christianity ( Church of the East , Oriental Orthodox , Eastern Orthodox , Eastern Catholic , Western Christianity ), Irreligion , Judaism , Mandaeism , Yazidism , Yarsanism    Related ethnic groups Sumerians , Akkadians , Babylonians and Other Arabs   Iraqis ( Arabic : العراقيون ) are people who originate from the country of Iraq .
Iraqi Arabs are the largest ethnic group in Iraq,  followed by Iraqi Kurds , then Iraqi Turkmen as the third largest ethnic group.
Other ethnic groups include Yazidis , Assyrians , Mandaeans , Armenians , and Marsh Arabs .
Iraq consists largely of most of ancient Mesopotamia , the native land of the indigenous Sumerian , Akkadian , Assyrian , and Babylonian civilizations, which was subsequently conquered, invaded and ruled by foreigners for centuries after the fall of the indigenous Mesopotamian empires.
As a direct consequence of this long history, the contemporary Iraqi population comprises a significant number of different ethnicities.
However, recent studies indicate that the different ethno-religious groups of Iraq ( Mesopotamia ) share significant similarities in genetics , likely due to centuries of assimilation between invading populations and the indigenous ethnic groups.
The daily language of the majority of Iraqis is Mesopotamian Arabic , and has been ever since the Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and the replacement of various Eastern Aramaic languages , most notably during the Abbasid Caliphate during which Baghdad became the capital of the caliphate and the center of Islamic Golden Age .
However, Mesopotamian Arabic is considered to be the most Aramaic-influenced dialect of Arabic, due to Aramaic having originated in Mesopotamia, and spread throughout the Fertile Crescent during the Neo-Assyrian period , eventually becoming the lingua franca of the entire region prior to the Islamic invasions of Mesopotamia.
In addition, Kurdish , Turkish (Turkmen) , Neo-Aramaic and Mandaic are other languages spoken by Iraqis and recognized by Iraq's constitution.
History   Part of a series on the Culture of Iraq  History  People  Languages  Cuisine  Religion  Art  Literature  Music  Media  Radio  Television  Cinema   Sport  Monuments  World Heritage Sites   Symbols  Flag  Coat of arms  National anthem    Iraq portal v t e  Main articles: Mesopotamia , History of Mesopotamia , and History of Iraq  In ancient and medieval times Mesopotamia was the political and cultural centre of many great empires and civilizations, such as the Akkadian Empire , Assyria , Assyrian Empire and Babylon Empire .
The ancient Mesopotamian civilization of Sumer is the oldest known civilization in the world,  and thus Iraq is widely known as the Cradle Of Civilization .
Iraq remained an important centre of civilization for millennia, up until the Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and subsequently Abbasid Caliphate (of which Baghdad was the capital ), which was the most advanced empire of the medieval world (see Islamic Golden Age ).
Hence Mesopotamia has witnessed several emigration and immigration in the past.
Further information on Iraq's civilization and cultural history can be found in the following chronology of Iraqi history:  Nemrik 9 (9800 BC – 8200 BC)  Jarmo (7000 – 5000 BC)  Sumer (6500 – 1940 BC)  Ubaid period (6500 – 4000 BC)  Uruk period (4000 – 3000 BC)  Early Dynastic period (3000 – 2334 BC)  Sumer and Akkad (1900 – 539 BC)  Akkadian Empire (2334 – 2218 BC)  Gutian dynasty (2218 – 2047 BC)  Neo-Sumerian Empire (2047 – 1940 BC)  Akkadian era  Babylonia (1900 - 539 BC)  Assyria (1900 – 609 BC)  Neo-Assyrian Empire (745 – 626 BC)  Neo-Babylonian Empire (626 – 539 BC)  Fall of Babylon (539 BC)  Achaemenid Empire (539 – 330 BC)  Achaemenid Assyria (539 – 330 BC)  Seleucid Babylonia (331 – 141 BC)  Parthian Babylonia (141 BC – 224)  Araba (100 BC – 240)  Adiabene (15 – 116)  Sassanid Persia (224 – 638)  Asuristan (224 – 638)  Lakhmids (266 – 633)  Islamic conquest (632 – 1258)  Rashidun Caliphate (638 – 661)  Umayyad Caliphate (661 – 750)  Abbasid Caliphate (750 – 1258)  Ilkhanate (1258 – 1335)  Turkic dynasties (1335 – 1501)  Jalayirid Sultanate (1335 – 1410)  Kara Koyunlu (1410 – 1468)  Ak Koyunlu (1468 – 1501)  Safavid dynasty (1501 – 1533)  Ottoman Empire (1533 – 1918)  Mamluk dynasty (1747 – 1831)  British Mandate for Mesopotamia (1920 – 1932)  Kingdom of Iraq (1932 – 1958)  Republic of Iraq (1958 –)  Iraqi Republic (1958 – 1968)  Ba'athist Iraq (1968 – 2003)  Genetics   Further information: Genetic history of the Middle East , Genetic history of the Arab world , and Assyrian people § Genetics  One study found that Haplogroup J-M172 originated in northern Iraq.
In spite of the importance of this region, genetic studies on the Iraqi people are limited and generally restricted to analysis of classical markers due to Iraq's modern political instability,  although there have been several published studies displaying a genealogical connection between all Iraqi peoples and the neighboring countries, across religious, ethnic and linguistic barriers.
Studies indicate that the different ethno-religious groups of Iraq ( Mesopotamia ) share significant similarities in genetics and that Mesopotamian Arabs, who make up the majority of Iraqis, are more genetically similar to Iraqi Kurds than other Arab populations in the Middle East and Arabia .
No significant differences in Y-DNA variation were observed among Iraqi Mesopotamian Arabs, Assyrians, or Kurds.
Modern genetic studies indicate that Iraqi Arabs and Iraqi Kurds are distantly related, though Iraqi Mesopotamian Arabs are more related to Iraqi-Assyrians than they are to Iraqi Kurds .
For both mtDNA and Y-DNA variation, the large majority of the haplogroups observed in the Iraqi population ( H , J , T , and U for the mtDNA, J-M172 and J-M267 for the Y-DNA) are those considered to have originated in Western Asia and to have later spread mainly in West Asia.
The Eurasian haplogroups R1b and R1a represent the second most frequent component of the Iraqi Y-chromosome gene pool, the latter suggests that the population movements from Central Asia into modern Iran also influenced Iraq.
Many historians and anthropologists provide strong circumstantial evidence to posit that Iraq's Marsh Arabs share very strong links to the ancient Sumerians   —the oldest human civilization in the world and most ancient inhabitants of central-southern Iraq.
The Iraqi-Assyrian population was found to be significantly related to other Iraqis, especially Mesopotamian Arabs,   likely due to the assimilation of indigenous Assyrians with other people groups who occupied and settled Mesopotamia after the fall of the Neo-Babylonian Empire .
Studies have reported that most Irish and Britons have ancestry to Neolithic farmers who left ancient Mesopotamia over 10,000 years ago.
Genetic researchers say they have found compelling evidence that, on average, four out of five (80%) Europeans can trace their Y chromosome to the ancient Near East .
In another study, scientists analyzed DNA from the 8,000-year-old remains of early farmers found at an ancient graveyard in Germany .
They compared the genetic signatures to those of modern populations and found similarities with the DNA of people living in today's Turkey and Iraq .
Language   Iraq's national languages are Arabic and the Kurdish languages .
The two main regional dialects of Arabic spoken by the Iraqi people are Mesopotamian Arabic (spoken in the Babylonian alluvial plain and Middle Euphrates valley) and South Mesopotamian Arabic and North Mesopotamian Arabic (spoken in the Assyrian highlands).
The two main dialects of Kurdish spoken by Kurdish people are Central Kurdish (spoken in the Erbil and Sulaymaniyah Governorates )  and Northern Kurdish (spoken in Dohuk Governorate ).
In addition to Arabic, most Assyrians and Mandaeans speak Neo-Aramaic languages .
Mesopotamian Arabic has an Aramaic  substratum .
Religion and ethnic groups   See also: Irreligion in Iraq  Mor Mattai Monastery Haydar-Khana Mosque  Ethnicity   Iraq's population was estimated to be 39,650,145 in 2021 (residing in Iraq).
Arabs are the majority ethnic group in Iraq, at around 80%.
The Kurds are the largest ethnic minority.
Turkmens are the third largest ethnic group in the country.
This is followed by Assyrians and Armenians (500,000), Yazidis (500,000), Marsh Arabs , and Shabaks , Persians (500,000) (250,000).
Other minorities include Mandaeans (6,000), Roma (50,000) and Circassians (2,000).
The most spoken language is Mesopotamian Arabic , followed by Kurdish , Iraqi Turkmen dialects and Syriac .
The percentages of different ethno-religious groups residing in Iraq vary from source to source due to the last Iraqi census having taken place over 30 years ago.
A new census of Iraq was planned to take place in 2020.
Religion   Iraqis are diverse in their faiths.
Over 95% of Iraqis are Muslim, divided between 55% Shias and 40% Sunnis.
In 1968 the Iraqi constitution established Islam as the official religion of the state.
Religion in Iraq (2019)      Islam (95%)   Yazidism (1.25%)   Christianity (1.25%)  others (incl.
Yarsanism , Zoroastrianism , Bahá'í , Mandaeism , Irreligion ) (2%)    In addition, Christianity in Iraq consists of various denominations.
The majority of Iraqi Christians are Chaldean Catholic Assyrians , whilst non-Syriac Christians are mostly Iraqi Arabs and Armenians.
Iraqi-Assyrians largely belong to the Syriac Orthodox Church , the Assyrian Church of the East , Chaldean Catholic Church , Ancient Church of the East , and the Syriac Catholic Church .
Iraqi Arab Christians belong to the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch and the Melkite Greek Catholic Church of Antioch , and Iraqi-Armenians belong to the Armenian Orthodox Church and Armenian Catholic Church .
Their numbers inside Iraq have dwindled to around 500,000+ since 2003.
Other religious groups include Mandaeans , Shabaks , Yazidis and followers of other minority religions .
Furthermore, Jews had also been present in Iraq in significant numbers historically, and Iraq had the largest Jewish population in the Middle East , but their population dwindled, after virtually all of them migrated to Israel between 1949 and 1952.
From 1949 to 1951, 104,000 Jews were evacuated from Iraq in Operations Ezra and Nechemia (named after the Jewish leaders who took their people back to Jerusalem from exile in Babylonia beginning in 597 B.C.E.
); another 20,000 were smuggled out through Iran.
Diaspora   Main articles: Iraqi diaspora and Refugees of Iraq  The Iraqi diaspora is not a sudden exodus but one that has grown rapidly through the 20th century as each generation faced some form of radical transition or political conflict.
From 1950 to 1952 Iraq saw a great exodus of roughly 120,000 - 130,000 of its Jewish population under the Israel-led " Operation Ezra and Nehemiah ".
There were at least two large waves of expatriation of both Christians and Muslims alike.
A great number of Iraqis left the country during the regime of Saddam Hussein and large numbers have left during the Iraq war and its aftermath.
Al-Hashimi , also transliterated Al-Hashemi ( Arabic : الهاشمي ), Hashemi , Hashimi, or Hashmi ( Persian : هاشمی ) is an Arabic and Persian surname.
The definite article Al- usually distinguishes the Arabic from the more numerous form.
It is the pronoun form of Hashim ( Arabic : هاشم ) and originally designated a member or descendant of the Banu Hashim clan of the Quraysh tribe .
The Islamic prophet , Muhammad was a member of this Arab tribe; his great-grandfather was Hashim ibn Abd Manaf , for whom the clan is named.
Members of this clan are referred to as Hashemites or Hashimis.
This refers in particular to:  the Sharifs of Mecca , the rulers of Mecca from the 10th century until 1924.
As descendants of Hasan ibn Ali , they belonged to the Bani Hashim.
the Hashemite royal family of Hejaz (1916–1925), Iraq (1921–1958), and Jordan (1921–present).
As descendants of Sharif Hussein ibn Ali , they belong to the Dhawu Awn, a branch of the Sharifs of Mecca, and therefore also of the Bani Hashim.
List   Notable people with this family name include:   'Abd al-Ilah (died 1958), Regent of Iraq  'Abd al-Rahim ibn Ja'far ibn Sulayman al-Hashimi (died c.
844), Abbasid personage and governor of the Yemen  Abdullah Hashmi'ties I of Jordan , king of Jordan  Abdullah Hashmi II , king of Jordan, kings of Jordan 1999- present  Abdul Razak al-Hashimi , former Iraqi diplomat  Alaa Al Hashimi (born 1953), Iraqi politician  Ali bin Hussein al-Hashimi (1879–1935), King of Hejaz  Ali Hashemi (born 1991), Iranian weightlifter  Ali ibn Sulayman al-Hashimi (ninth century), Muslim scholar  Amir Hashemi (born 1966), former Iranian football player  Amir-Hossein Ghazizadeh Hashemi (born 1971), Iranian politician  Aqila al-Hashimi (1953–2003), Iraqi politician  Asad al-Hashemi , Iraqi politician  Bagher Hashemi (born 1994), Iranian footballer  Bashir Al-Hashimi (born 1961), British academic  Bobby Hashemi (born 1991), British entrepreneur  Cyrus Hashemi (1942–1986), Iranian arms dealer  Ehsan Ghazizadeh Hashemi (born 1976), Iranian politician  Emraan Hashmi (born 1979), Indian film actor  Fahad Hashmi (born 1989), Pakistani artist, actor and broadcaster  Farhat Hashmi a Pakistani Canadian Islamic scholar  Farideh Hashemi (born 1939), Iranian politician  Farshad Hashemi (born 1997), Iranian footballer  Fatemeh Hashemi (born 1969), Iranian television actress  Fawaz al-Hashimi (died 2004), member of Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula  Faysal I of Iraq (died 1933), Hashemite King of Syria and Iraq  Faysal II of Iraq (died 1958), Last Hashemite King of Iraq  Ghazala Hashmi (born 1964), American politician representing the 10th district in the Senate of Virginia.
Gita Hashemi (born 1961), Iranian-born Canadian artist, writer and curator  Harun ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Hashimi (died 901), Abbasid personage and governor of Mecca, Medina and al-Ta'if  Hashim Al-Hashimi , American biochemist  Hassan Ghazizadeh Hashemi (born 1959), Iranian ophthalmologist  Hisham al-Hashimi (1973–2020), Iraqi researcher  Hossein Hashemi (born 1953), Iranian politician  Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca (Hashemites) , Ottoman Empire , King of Hejaz , King of the Arab Countries  Ibn Sa'd Hashmi , (Katib al-Waqidi), was a scholar and Arabian biographer, Book (Book of the Major Classes)  Ishaaq bin Ahmed bin Muhammad al-Hashimi , scholar and patriarch of the Somali  Isaaq clan-family  Ishaq ibn al-Abbas ibn Muhammad al-Hashimi (ninth century), Abbasid personage and governor of the Yemen  Jabron Hashmi (1982–2006), British soldier who served with the elite 3 PARA Battlegroup and was killed in action in Afghanistan.
Jamshid Hashemi (1936–2013), Iranian arms dealer  Jassem Al-Hashemi (born 1996), Qatari footballer  Javad Hashemi (born 1966), Iranian actor, film director, writer and composer  Kioumars Hashemi , Iranian sports executive  Manouchehr Hashemi (1918–2007), SAVAK intelligence agency officer  Maryam Hashemi (born 1977), Iranian visual artist  Marzieh Hashemi (born 1959), American-born Iranian journalist and television presenter  Maysoon al-Hashemi (1946–2006), Iraqi politician  Mehdi Hashemi (1946–1987), Iranian Shi'a cleric  Mehdi Hashemi (actor) (born 1946), Iranian actor, screenwriter, and director  Mirhani Hashemi (born 1983), Iranian footballer  Mohamed Al-Hashimi (born 1965), Omani sprinter  Mohammad Hashemi (born 1951), Iranian businessman and former intelligence officer  Mohsen Al-Hashemi (born 1990), Emirati footballer  Mojtaba Samareh Hashemi , Iranian politician  Muhammad al-Hashimi al-Tilimsani (1881–1961), Algerian (by birth) and Syrian (by residence) Sufi saint and scholar  Muhammad Yusuf Hashmi , Reformer and Leader of the Pakistan Movement, who achieved high distinction in English studies in British India  Nadia Hashimi (born 1977), Afghan-American pediatric physician, novelist, and politician  Sayed Rahman Hashemi , Afghan politician  Reem Al Hashimy , minister of the United Arab Emirates  Sahar Hashemi , British entrepreneur  Sajjad Hashemi (born 1991), Iranian sprint athlete  Saud al-Hashimi (born 1963), Saudi Arabian human rights activist  Sayed Abdul Karim Hashimi , Afghan politician  Sayed Maqsood Hashemi (born 1984), Afghan footballer  Sayed Mohammad Hashemi (born 1994), Afghan footballer  Sayed Rahmatullah Hashemi (born 1978), Afghan diplomat  Sayed Zafar Hashemi (born 1985), Afghan politician  Seyed Zia Hashemi (born 1968), Iranian politician  Seyyed Mehdi Hashemi (born 1964), Iranian politician  Shakiba Hashemi , Afghani politician  Shamim Hashimi (born 1947), Urdu and Persian poet  Taha al-Hashimi (1888–1961), Iraqi politician  Talal Hashmi , kings of Jordan  Tariq al-Hashemi (born 1942), Iraqi politician  Wijdan Ali Al-Hashemi (born 1939), Jordanian artist, educator and diplomat  Wissam S.
al-Hashimi (died 2004), Iraqi geologist  Yasin al-Hashimi (1884–1937), Iraqi politician  Zakaria Hashemi (born 1936), Iranian actor and film director  Zarina Hashmi (1937–2020), Indian-American artist  Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
Form of mathematical proof  Not to be confused with inductive reasoning .
Mathematical induction can be informally illustrated by reference to the sequential effect of falling dominoes .
Mathematical induction is a method for proving that a statement     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   is true for every natural number      n    {\displaystyle n}   , that is, that the infinitely many cases     P  (  0  )  ,  P  (  1  )  ,  P  (  2  )  ,  P  (  3  )  ,  …    {\displaystyle P(0),P(1),P(2),P(3),\dots }   all hold.
This is done by first proving a simple case, then also showing that if we assume the claim is true for a given case, then the next case is also true.
Informal metaphors help to explain this technique, such as falling dominoes or climbing a ladder:  Mathematical induction proves that we can climb as high as we like on a ladder, by proving that we can climb onto the bottom rung (the basis ) and that from each rung we can climb up to the next one (the step ).
— Concrete Mathematics , page 3 margins.
A proof by induction consists of two cases.
The first, the base case , proves the statement for     n  =  0    {\displaystyle n=0}   without assuming any knowledge of other cases.
The second case, the induction step , proves that if the statement holds for any given case     n  =  k    {\displaystyle n=k}   , then it must also hold for the next case     n  =  k  +  1    {\displaystyle n=k+1}   .
These two steps establish that the statement holds for every natural number     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
The base case does not necessarily begin with     n  =  0    {\displaystyle n=0}   , but often with     n  =  1    {\displaystyle n=1}   , and possibly with any fixed natural number     n  =  N    {\displaystyle n=N}   , establishing the truth of the statement for all natural numbers     n  ≥  N    {\displaystyle n\geq N}   .
The method can be extended to prove statements about more general well-founded structures, such as trees ; this generalization, known as structural induction , is used in mathematical logic and computer science .
Mathematical induction in this extended sense is closely related to recursion .
Mathematical induction is an inference rule used in formal proofs , and is the foundation of most correctness proofs for computer programs.
Despite its name, mathematical induction differs fundamentally from inductive reasoning as used in philosophy , in which the examination of many cases results in a probable conclusion.
The mathematical method examines infinitely many cases to prove a general statement, but it does so by a finite chain of deductive reasoning involving the variable      n    {\displaystyle n}   , which can take infinitely many values.
The result is a rigorous proof of the statement, not an assertion of its probability.
History   In 370 BC, Plato 's Parmenides may have contained traces of an early example of an implicit inductive proof.
The earliest implicit proof by mathematical induction was written by al-Karaji around 1000 AD, who applied it to arithmetic sequences to prove the binomial theorem and properties of Pascal's triangle .
Whilst the original work was lost, it was later referenced by Al-Samawal al-Maghribi in his treatise al-Bahir fi'l-jabr (The Brilliant in Algebra) in around 1150 AD.
Katz says in his history of mathematics Another important idea introduced by al-Karaji and continued by al-Samaw'al and others was that of an inductive argument for dealing with certain arithmetic sequences.
Thus al-Karaji used such an argument to prove the result on the sums of integral cubes already known to Aryabhata  Al-Karaji did not, however, state a general result for arbitrary n .
He stated his theorem for the particular integer 10  His proof, nevertheless, was clearly designed to be extendable to any other integer.
Al-Karaji's argument includes in essence the two basic components of a modern argument by induction, namely the truth of the statement for n = 1 (1 = 1 3 ) and the deriving of the truth for n = k from that of n = k - 1.
Of course, this second component is not explicit since, in some sense, al-Karaji's argument is in reverse; this is, he starts from n = 10 and goes down to 1 rather than proceeding upward.
Nevertheless, his argument in al-Fakhri is the earliest extant proof of the sum formula for integral cubes .
In India, early implicit proofs by mathematical induction appear in Bhaskara 's " cyclic method ".
None of these ancient mathematicians, however, explicitly stated the induction hypothesis.
Another similar case (contrary to what Vacca has written, as Freudenthal carefully showed)  was that of Francesco Maurolico in his Arithmeticorum libri duo (1575), who used the technique to prove that the sum of the first n  odd  integers is n 2 .
The earliest rigorous use of induction was by Gersonides (1288–1344).
Another Frenchman, Fermat , made ample use of a related principle: indirect proof by infinite descent .
The induction hypothesis was also employed by the Swiss Jakob Bernoulli , and from then on it became well known.
The modern formal treatment of the principle came only in the 19th century, with George Boole ,   Augustus De Morgan , Charles Sanders Peirce ,    Giuseppe Peano , and Richard Dedekind .
Description   The simplest and most common form of mathematical induction infers that a statement involving a natural number  n (that is, an integer n ≥ 0 or 1) holds for all values of n .
The proof consists of two steps:  The base case (or initial case ): prove that the statement holds for 0, or 1.
The induction step (or inductive step , or step case ): prove that for every n , if the statement holds for n , then it holds for n + 1 .
In other words, assume that the statement holds for some arbitrary natural number n , and prove that the statement holds for n + 1 .
The hypothesis in the induction step, that the statement holds for a particular n , is called the induction hypothesis or inductive hypothesis .
To prove the induction step, one assumes the induction hypothesis for n and then uses this assumption to prove that the statement holds for n + 1 .
Authors who prefer to define natural numbers to begin at 0 use that value in the base case; those who define natural numbers to begin at 1 use that value.
Examples   Sum of consecutive natural numbers   Mathematical induction can be used to prove the following statement P ( n ) for all natural numbers n .
P  (  n  )   :      0  +  1  +  2  +  ⋯  +  n  =     n  (  n  +  1  )   2    .
{\displaystyle P(n)\!
:\ \ 0+1+2+\cdots +n={\frac {n(n+1)}{2}}.}
This states a general formula for the sum of the natural numbers less than or equal to a given number; in fact an infinite sequence of statements:     0  =      (  0  )  (  0  +  1  )   2       {\displaystyle 0={\tfrac {(0)(0+1)}{2}}}   ,     0  +  1  =      (  1  )  (  1  +  1  )   2       {\displaystyle 0+1={\tfrac {(1)(1+1)}{2}}}   ,     0  +  1  +  2  =      (  2  )  (  2  +  1  )   2       {\displaystyle 0+1+2={\tfrac {(2)(2+1)}{2}}}   , etc.
Proposition.
For every     n  ∈   N     {\displaystyle n\in \mathbb {N} }   ,     0  +  1  +  2  +  ⋯  +  n  =      n  (  n  +  1  )   2     .
{\displaystyle 0+1+2+\cdots +n={\tfrac {n(n+1)}{2}}.}
Proof.
Let P ( n ) be the statement     0  +  1  +  2  +  ⋯  +  n  =      n  (  n  +  1  )   2     .
We give a proof by induction on n .
Base case: Show that the statement holds for the smallest natural number n = 0 .
P (0) is clearly true:     0  =      0  (  0  +  1  )   2      .
{\displaystyle 0={\tfrac {0(0+1)}{2}}\,.}
Induction step: Show that for every k ≥ 0 , if P ( k ) holds, then P ( k + 1) also holds.
Assume the induction hypothesis that for a particular k , the single case n = k holds, meaning P ( k ) is true:     0  +  1  +  ⋯  +  k  =     k  (  k  +  1  )   2    .
{\displaystyle 0+1+\cdots +k={\frac {k(k+1)}{2}}.}
It follows that:     (  0  +  1  +  2  +  ⋯  +  k  )  +  (  k  +  1  )  =     k  (  k  +  1  )   2    +  (  k  +  1  )  .
{\displaystyle (0+1+2+\cdots +k)+(k+1)={\frac {k(k+1)}{2}}+(k+1).}
Algebraically , the right hand side simplifies as:            k  (  k  +  1  )   2    +  (  k  +  1  )     =     k  (  k  +  1  )  +  2  (  k  +  1  )   2          =     (  k  +  1  )  (  k  +  2  )   2          =     (  k  +  1  )  (  (  k  +  1  )  +  1  )   2    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\frac {k(k+1)}{2}}+(k+1)&={\frac {k(k+1)+2(k+1)}{2}}\\&={\frac {(k+1)(k+2)}{2}}\\&={\frac {(k+1)((k+1)+1)}{2}}.\end{aligned}}}    Equating the extreme left hand and right hand sides, we deduce that:     0  +  1  +  2  +  ⋯  +  k  +  (  k  +  1  )  =     (  k  +  1  )  (  (  k  +  1  )  +  1  )   2    .
{\displaystyle 0+1+2+\cdots +k+(k+1)={\frac {(k+1)((k+1)+1)}{2}}.}
That is, the statement P ( k + 1) also holds true, establishing the induction step.
Conclusion: Since both the base case and the induction step have been proved as true, by mathematical induction the statement P ( n ) holds for every natural number n .
Q.E.D.
A trigonometric inequality   Induction is often used to prove inequalities .
As an example, we prove that      |   sin  ⁡  n  x   |   ≤  n   |   sin  ⁡  x   |     {\displaystyle \left|\sin nx\right|\leq n\left|\sin x\right|}   for any real number      x    {\displaystyle x}   and natural number     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
At first glance, it may appear that a more general version,      |   sin  ⁡  n  x   |   ≤  n   |   sin  ⁡  x   |     {\displaystyle \left|\sin nx\right|\leq n\left|\sin x\right|}   for any real numbers     n  ,  x    {\displaystyle n,x}   , could be proven without induction; but the case     n  =    1  2    ,   x  =  π    {\textstyle n={\frac {1}{2}},\,x=\pi }   shows it may be false for non-integer values of     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
This suggests we examine the statement specifically for natural values of     n    {\displaystyle n}   , and induction is the readiest tool.
For any     x  ∈   R     {\displaystyle x\in \mathbb {R} }   and     n  ∈   N     {\displaystyle n\in \mathbb {N} }   ,      |   sin  ⁡  n  x   |   ≤  n   |   sin  ⁡  x   |     {\displaystyle \left|\sin nx\right|\leq n\left|\sin x\right|}   .
Fix an arbitrary real number     x    {\displaystyle x}   , and let     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   be the statement      |   sin  ⁡  n  x   |   ≤  n   |   sin  ⁡  x   |     {\displaystyle \left|\sin nx\right|\leq n\left|\sin x\right|}   .
We induce on     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Base case: The calculation      |   sin  ⁡  0  x   |   =  0  ≤  0  =  0   |   sin  ⁡  x   |     {\displaystyle \left|\sin 0x\right|=0\leq 0=0\left|\sin x\right|}   verifies     P  (  0  )    {\displaystyle P(0)}   .
Induction step: We show the implication      P  (  k  )   ⟹   P  (  k  +  1  )    {\displaystyle P(k)\implies P(k+1)}   for any natural number     k    {\displaystyle k}   .
Assume the induction hypothesis: for a given value     n  =  k  ≥  0    {\displaystyle n=k\geq 0}   , the single case     P  (  k  )    {\displaystyle P(k)}   is true.
Using the angle addition formula and the triangle inequality , we deduce:          |   sin  ⁡  (  k  +  1  )  x   |      =   |   sin  ⁡  k  x  cos  ⁡  x  +  sin  ⁡  x  cos  ⁡  k  x   |       (angle addition)         ≤   |   sin  ⁡  k  x  cos  ⁡  x   |   +   |   sin  ⁡  x   cos  ⁡  k  x   |       (triangle inequality)         =   |   sin  ⁡  k  x   |    |   cos  ⁡  x   |   +   |   sin  ⁡  x   |    |   cos  ⁡  k  x   |         ≤   |   sin  ⁡  k  x   |   +   |   sin  ⁡  x   |       (   |   cos  ⁡  t   |   ≤  1  )        ≤  k   |   sin  ⁡  x   |   +   |   sin  ⁡  x   |       (induction hypothesis   )        =  (  k  +  1  )   |   sin  ⁡  x   |   .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\left|\sin(k+1)x\right|&=\left|\sin kx\cos x+\sin x\cos kx\right|&&{\text{(angle addition)}}\\&\leq \left|\sin kx\cos x\right|+\left|\sin x\,\cos kx\right|&&{\text{(triangle inequality)}}\\&=\left|\sin kx\right|\left|\cos x\right|+\left|\sin x\right|\left|\cos kx\right|\\&\leq \left|\sin kx\right|+\left|\sin x\right|&&(\left|\cos t\right|\leq 1)\\&\leq k\left|\sin x\right|+\left|\sin x\right|&&{\text{(induction hypothesis}})\\&=(k+1)\left|\sin x\right|.\end{aligned}}}    The inequality between the extreme left-hand and right-hand quantities shows that     P  (  k  +  1  )    {\displaystyle P(k+1)}   is true, which completes the induction step.
Conclusion: The proposition     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   holds for all natural numbers     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}    Q.E.D.
Variants   This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .
Please help improve this section by introducing more precise citations.
( July 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  In practice, proofs by induction are often structured differently, depending on the exact nature of the property to be proven.
All variants of induction are special cases of transfinite induction ; see below .
Base case other than 0 or 1   If one wishes to prove a statement, not for all natural numbers, but only for all numbers n greater than or equal to a certain number b , then the proof by induction consists of the following:  Showing that the statement holds when n = b .
Showing that if the statement holds for an arbitrary number n ≥ b , then the same statement also holds for n + 1 .
This can be used, for example, to show that 2 n ≥ n + 5 for n ≥ 3 .
In this way, one can prove that some statement P ( n ) holds for all n ≥ 1 , or even for all n ≥ −5 .
This form of mathematical induction is actually a special case of the previous form, because if the statement to be proved is P ( n ) then proving it with these two rules is equivalent with proving P ( n + b ) for all natural numbers n with an induction base case 0 .
Example: forming dollar amounts by coins   Assume an infinite supply of 4- and 5-dollar coins.
Induction can be used to prove that any whole amount of dollars greater than or equal to 12 can be formed by a combination of such coins.
Let S ( k ) denote the statement " k dollars can be formed by a combination of 4- and 5-dollar coins".
The proof that S ( k ) is true for all k ≥ 12 can then be achieved by induction on k as follows: Base case: Showing that S ( k ) holds for k = 12 is simple: take three 4-dollar coins.
Induction step: Given that S ( k ) holds for some value of k ≥ 12 ( induction hypothesis ), prove that S ( k + 1) holds, too.
Assume S ( k ) is true for some arbitrary k ≥ 12 .
If there is a solution for k dollars that includes at least one 4-dollar coin, replace it by a 5-dollar coin to make k + 1 dollars.
Otherwise, if only 5-dollar coins are used, k must be a multiple of 5 and so at least 15; but then we can replace three 5-dollar coins by four 4-dollar coins to make k + 1 dollars.
In each case, S ( k + 1) is true.
Therefore, by the principle of induction, S ( k ) holds for all k ≥ 12 , and the proof is complete.
In this example, although S ( k ) also holds for     k  ∈  {  4  ,  5  ,  8  ,  9  ,  10  }    {\textstyle k\in \{4,5,8,9,10\}}   , the above proof cannot be modified to replace the minimum amount of 12 dollar to any lower value m .
For m = 11 , the base case is actually false; for m = 10 , the second case in the induction step (replacing three 5- by four 4-dollar coins) will not work; let alone for even lower m .
Induction on more than one counter   It is sometimes desirable to prove a statement involving two natural numbers, n and m , by iterating the induction process.
That is, one proves a base case and an induction step for n , and in each of those proves a base case and an induction step for m .
See, for example, the proof of commutativity accompanying addition of natural numbers .
More complicated arguments involving three or more counters are also possible.
Infinite descent   Main article: Infinite descent  The method of infinite descent is a variation of mathematical induction which was used by Pierre de Fermat .
It is used to show that some statement Q ( n ) is false for all natural numbers n .
Its traditional form consists of showing that if Q ( n ) is true for some natural number n , it also holds for some strictly smaller natural number m .
Because there are no infinite decreasing sequences of natural numbers, this situation would be impossible, thereby showing ( by contradiction ) that Q ( n ) cannot be true for any n .
The validity of this method can be verified from the usual principle of mathematical induction.
Using mathematical induction on the statement P ( n ) defined as " Q ( m ) is false for all natural numbers m less than or equal to n ", it follows that P ( n ) holds for all n , which means that Q ( n ) is false for every natural number n .
Limited mathematical induction   If one wishes to prove that a property P holds for all natural numbers less than or equal to n , proving P satisfies the following conditions suffices:    P holds for 0,  For any natural number x less than n , if P holds for x , then P holds for x + 1  Prefix induction   The most common form of proof by mathematical induction requires proving in the induction step that     ∀  k   (  P  (  k  )  →  P  (  k  +  1  )  )    {\displaystyle \forall k\,(P(k)\to P(k+1))}    whereupon the induction principle "automates" n applications of this step in getting from P (0) to P ( n ) .
This could be called "predecessor induction" because each step proves something about a number from something about that number's predecessor.
A variant of interest in computational complexity is "prefix induction", in which one proves the following statement in the induction step:     ∀  k   (  P  (  k  )  →  P  (  2  k  )  ∧  P  (  2  k  +  1  )  )    {\displaystyle \forall k\,(P(k)\to P(2k)\land P(2k+1))}   or equivalently     ∀  k    (   P    (   ⌊    k  2    ⌋   )   →  P  (  k  )   )     {\displaystyle \forall k\,\left(P\!\left(\left\lfloor {\frac {k}{2}}\right\rfloor \right)\to P(k)\right)}    The induction principle then "automates" log 2  n applications of this inference in getting from P (0) to P ( n ) .
In fact, it is called "prefix induction" because each step proves something about a number from something about the "prefix" of that number — as formed by truncating the low bit of its binary representation .
It can also be viewed as an application of traditional induction on the length of that binary representation.
If traditional predecessor induction is interpreted computationally as an n -step loop, then prefix induction would correspond to a log- n -step loop.
Because of that, proofs using prefix induction are "more feasibly constructive" than proofs using predecessor induction.
Predecessor induction can trivially simulate prefix induction on the same statement.
Prefix induction can simulate predecessor induction, but only at the cost of making the statement more syntactically complex (adding a bounded  universal quantifier ), so the interesting results relating prefix induction to polynomial-time computation depend on excluding unbounded quantifiers entirely, and limiting the alternation of bounded universal and existential quantifiers allowed in the statement.
One can take the idea a step further: one must prove     ∀  k    (   P    (   ⌊    k    ⌋   )   →  P  (  k  )   )     {\displaystyle \forall k\,\left(P\!\left(\left\lfloor {\sqrt {k}}\right\rfloor \right)\to P(k)\right)}   whereupon the induction principle "automates" log log n applications of this inference in getting from P (0) to P ( n ) .
This form of induction has been used, analogously, to study log-time parallel computation.
Complete (strong) induction   Another variant, called complete induction , course of values induction or strong induction (in contrast to which the basic form of induction is sometimes known as weak induction ), makes the induction step easier to prove by using a stronger hypothesis: one proves the statement     P  (  m  +  1  )    {\displaystyle P(m+1)}   under the assumption that     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   holds for all natural numbers     n    {\displaystyle n}   less than     m  +  1    {\displaystyle m+1}   ; by contrast, the basic form only assumes     P  (  m  )    {\displaystyle P(m)}   .
The name "strong induction" does not mean that this method can prove more than "weak induction", but merely refers to the stronger hypothesis used in the induction step.
In fact, it can be shown that the two methods are actually equivalent, as explained below.
In this form of complete induction, one still has to prove the base case,     P  (  0  )    {\displaystyle P(0)}   , and it may even be necessary to prove extra-base cases such as     P  (  1  )    {\displaystyle P(1)}   before the general argument applies, as in the example below of the Fibonacci number       F   n      {\displaystyle F_{n}}   .
Although the form just described requires one to prove the base case, this is unnecessary if one can prove     P  (  m  )    {\displaystyle P(m)}   (assuming     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   for all lower     n    {\displaystyle n}   ) for all     m  ≥  0    {\displaystyle m\geq 0}   .
This is a special case of transfinite induction as described below, although it is no longer equivalent to ordinary induction.
In this form the base case is subsumed by the case     m  =  0    {\displaystyle m=0}   , where     P  (  0  )    {\displaystyle P(0)}   is proved with no other     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   assumed; this case may need to be handled separately, but sometimes the same argument applies for     m  =  0    {\displaystyle m=0}   and     m  >  0    {\displaystyle m>0}   , making the proof simpler and more elegant.
In this method, however, it is vital to ensure that the proof of     P  (  m  )    {\displaystyle P(m)}   does not implicitly assume that     m  >  0    {\displaystyle m>0}   , e.g.
by saying "choose an arbitrary     n  <  m    {\displaystyle n<m}   ", or by assuming that a set of m elements has an element.
Equivalence with ordinary induction   Complete induction is equivalent to ordinary mathematical induction as described above, in the sense that a proof by one method can be transformed into a proof by the other.
Suppose there is a proof of     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   by complete induction.
Then, this proof can be transformed into an ordinary induction proof by assuming a stronger inductive hypothesis.
Let     Q  (  n  )    {\displaystyle Q(n)}   be the statement "     P  (  m  )    {\displaystyle P(m)}   holds for all     m    {\displaystyle m}   such that     0  ≤  m  ≤  n    {\displaystyle 0\leq m\leq n}   "—this becomes the inductive hypothesis for ordinary induction.
We can then show     Q  (  0  )    {\displaystyle Q(0)}   and     Q  (  n  +  1  )    {\displaystyle Q(n+1)}   for     n  ∈   N     {\displaystyle n\in \mathbb {N} }   assuming only     Q  (  n  )    {\displaystyle Q(n)}   and show that     Q  (  n  )    {\displaystyle Q(n)}   implies     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   .
If, on the other hand,     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   had been proven by ordinary induction, the proof would already effectively be one by complete induction:     P  (  0  )    {\displaystyle P(0)}   is proved in the base case, using no assumptions, and     P  (  n  +  1  )    {\displaystyle P(n+1)}   is proved in the induction step, in which one may assume all earlier cases but need only use the case     P  (  n  )    {\displaystyle P(n)}   .
Example: Fibonacci numbers   Complete induction is most useful when several instances of the inductive hypothesis are required for each induction step.
For example, complete induction can be used to show that      F   n    =      φ   n    −   ψ   n      φ  −  ψ       {\displaystyle F_{n}={\frac {\varphi ^{n}-\psi ^{n}}{\varphi -\psi }}}   where      F   n      {\displaystyle F_{n}}   is the n -th Fibonacci number , and     φ  =    1  2    (  1  +    5    )    {\textstyle \varphi ={\frac {1}{2}}(1+{\sqrt {5}})}   (the golden ratio ) and     ψ  =    1  2    (  1  −    5    )    {\textstyle \psi ={\frac {1}{2}}(1-{\sqrt {5}})}   are the roots of the polynomial       x   2    −  x  −  1    {\displaystyle x^{2}-x-1}   .
By using the fact that      F   n  +  2    =   F   n  +  1    +   F   n      {\displaystyle F_{n+2}=F_{n+1}+F_{n}}   for each     n  ∈   N     {\displaystyle n\in \mathbb {N} }   , the identity above can be verified by direct calculation for      F   n  +  2      {\textstyle F_{n+2}}   if one assumes that it already holds for both      F   n  +  1      {\textstyle F_{n+1}}   and      F   n      {\textstyle F_{n}}   .
To complete the proof, the identity must be verified in the two base cases:     n  =  0    {\displaystyle n=0}   and     n  =  1    {\textstyle n=1}   .
Example: prime factorization   Another proof by complete induction uses the hypothesis that the statement holds for all smaller     n    {\displaystyle n}   more thoroughly.
Consider the statement that "every natural number greater than 1 is a product of (one or more) prime numbers ", which is the " existence " part of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
For proving the induction step, the induction hypothesis is that for a given     n  >  1    {\displaystyle n>1}   the statement holds for all smaller     n  >  1    {\displaystyle n>1}   .
If     m    {\displaystyle m}   is prime then it is certainly a product of primes, and if not, then by definition it is a product:     m  =   n   1     n   2      {\displaystyle m=n_{1}n_{2}}   , where neither of the factors is equal to 1; hence neither is equal to     m    {\displaystyle m}   , and so both are greater than 1 and smaller than     m    {\displaystyle m}   .
The induction hypothesis now applies to      n   1      {\displaystyle n_{1}}   and      n   2      {\displaystyle n_{2}}   , so each one is a product of primes.
Thus     m    {\displaystyle m}   is a product of products of primes, and hence by extension a product of primes itself.
Example: dollar amounts revisited   We shall look to prove the same example as above , this time with strong induction .
The statement remains the same:     S  (  n  )  :    n  ≥  12   ⟹    ∃   a  ,  b  ∈   N   .
n  =  4  a  +  5  b    {\displaystyle S(n):\,\,n\geq 12\implies \,\exists \,a,b\in \mathbb {N} .\,\,n=4a+5b}    However, there will be slight differences in the structure and the assumptions of the proof, starting with the extended base case.
Base case: Show that     S  (  k  )    {\displaystyle S(k)}   holds for     k  =  12  ,  13  ,  14  ,  15    {\displaystyle k=12,13,14,15}   .
4  ⋅  3  +  5  ⋅  0  =  12      4  ⋅  2  +  5  ⋅  1  =  13      4  ⋅  1  +  5  ⋅  2  =  14      4  ⋅  0  +  5  ⋅  3  =  15        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}4\cdot 3+5\cdot 0=12\\4\cdot 2+5\cdot 1=13\\4\cdot 1+5\cdot 2=14\\4\cdot 0+5\cdot 3=15\end{aligned}}}    The base case holds.
Induction step: Given some     j  >  15    {\displaystyle j>15}   , assume     S  (  m  )    {\displaystyle S(m)}   holds for all     m    {\displaystyle m}   with     12  ≤  m  <  j    {\displaystyle 12\leq m<j}   .
Prove that     S  (  j  )    {\displaystyle S(j)}   holds.
Choosing     m  =  j  −  4    {\displaystyle m=j-4}   , and observing that     15  <  j   ⟹   12  ≤  j  −  4  <  j    {\displaystyle 15<j\implies 12\leq j-4<j}   shows that     S  (  j  −  4  )    {\displaystyle S(j-4)}   holds, by the inductive hypothesis.
That is, the sum     j  −  4    {\displaystyle j-4}   can be formed by some combination of     4    {\displaystyle 4}   and     5    {\displaystyle 5}   dollar coins.
Then, simply adding a     4    {\displaystyle 4}   dollar coin to that combination yields the sum     j    {\displaystyle j}   .
That is,     S  (  j  )    {\displaystyle S(j)}   holds  Q.E.D.
Forward-backward induction   Main article: Forward-backward induction  Sometimes, it is more convenient to deduce backwards, proving the statement for     n  −  1    {\displaystyle n-1}   , given its validity for     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
However, proving the validity of the statement for no single number suffices to establish the base case; instead, one needs to prove the statement for an infinite subset of the natural numbers.
For example, Augustin Louis Cauchy first used forward (regular) induction to prove the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means for all powers of 2 , and then used backwards induction to show it for all natural numbers.
Example of error in the induction step   Main article: All horses are the same color  The induction step must be proved for all values of n .
To illustrate this, Joel E.
Cohen proposed the following argument, which purports to prove by mathematical induction that all horses are of the same color :   Base case: in a set of only one horse, there is only one color.
Induction step: assume as induction hypothesis that within any set of     n    {\displaystyle n}   horses, there is only one color.
Now look at any set of     n  +  1    {\displaystyle n+1}   horses.
Number them:     1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  …  ,  n  ,  n  +  1    {\displaystyle 1,2,3,\dotsc ,n,n+1}   .
Consider the sets      {   1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  …  ,  n   }     {\textstyle \left\{1,2,3,\dotsc ,n\right\}}   and      {   2  ,  3  ,  4  ,  …  ,  n  +  1   }     {\textstyle \left\{2,3,4,\dotsc ,n+1\right\}}   .
Each is a set of only     n    {\displaystyle n}   horses, therefore within each there is only one color.
But the two sets overlap, so there must be only one color among all     n  +  1    {\displaystyle n+1}   horses.
The base case     n  =  1    {\displaystyle n=1}   is trivial, and the induction step is correct in all cases     n  >  1    {\displaystyle n>1}   .
However, the argument used in the induction step is incorrect for     n  +  1  =  2    {\displaystyle n+1=2}   , because the statement that "the two sets overlap" is false for      {  1  }     {\textstyle \left\{1\right\}}   and      {  2  }     {\textstyle \left\{2\right\}}   .
Formalization   In second-order logic , one can write down the " axiom of induction" as follows:     ∀  P     (    P  (  0  )  ∧  ∀  k    (    P  (  k  )  →  P  (  k  +  1  )    )    →  ∀  n     (    P  (  n  )    )      )    ,    {\displaystyle \forall P\,{\Bigl (}P(0)\land \forall k{\bigl (}P(k)\to P(k+1){\bigr )}\to \forall n\,{\bigl (}P(n){\bigr )}{\Bigr )},}   where P (·) is a variable for predicates involving one natural number and k and n are variables for natural numbers .
In words, the base case P (0) and the induction step (namely, that the induction hypothesis P ( k ) implies P ( k + 1) ) together imply that P ( n ) for any natural number n .
The axiom of induction asserts the validity of inferring that P ( n ) holds for any natural number n from the base case and the induction step.
The first quantifier in the axiom ranges over predicates rather than over individual numbers.
This is a second-order quantifier, which means that this axiom is stated in second-order logic .
Axiomatizing arithmetic induction in first-order logic requires an axiom schema containing a separate axiom for each possible predicate.
The article Peano axioms contains further discussion of this issue.
The axiom of structural induction for the natural numbers was first formulated by Peano, who used it to specify the natural numbers together with the following four other axioms:  0 is a natural number.
The successor function s of every natural number yields a natural number ( s ( x ) = x + 1) .
The successor function is injective .
0 is not in the range of s .
In first-order  ZFC set theory , quantification over predicates is not allowed, but one can still express induction by quantification over sets:     ∀  A    (    0  ∈  A  ∧  ∀  k  ∈   N     (    k  ∈  A  →  (  k  +  1  )  ∈  A    )    →   N   ⊆  A    )      {\displaystyle \forall A{\Bigl (}0\in A\land \forall k\in \mathbb {N} {\bigl (}k\in A\to (k+1)\in A{\bigr )}\to \mathbb {N} \subseteq A{\Bigr )}}    A may be read as a set representing a proposition, and containing natural numbers, for which the proposition holds.
This is not an axiom, but a theorem, given that natural numbers are defined in the language of ZFC set theory by axioms, analogous to Peano's.
See construction of the natural numbers using the axiom of infinity and axiom schema of specification .
Transfinite induction   Main article: Transfinite induction  One variation of the principle of complete induction can be generalized for statements about elements of any well-founded set , that is, a set with an irreflexive relation < that contains no infinite descending chains .
Every set representing an ordinal number is well-founded, the set of natural numbers is one of them.
Applied to a well-founded set, transfinite induction can be formulated as a single step.
To prove that a statement P ( n ) holds for each ordinal number:  Show, for each ordinal number n , that if P ( m ) holds for all m < n , then P ( n ) also holds.
This form of induction, when applied to a set of ordinal numbers (which form a well-ordered and hence well-founded class ), is called transfinite induction .
It is an important proof technique in set theory , topology and other fields.
Proofs by transfinite induction typically distinguish three cases:  when n is a minimal element, i.e.
there is no element smaller than n ;  when n has a direct predecessor, i.e.
the set of elements which are smaller than n has a largest element;  when n has no direct predecessor, i.e.
n is a so-called limit ordinal .
Strictly speaking, it is not necessary in transfinite induction to prove a base case, because it is a vacuous special case of the proposition that if P is true of all n < m , then P is true of m .
It is vacuously true precisely because there are no values of n < m that could serve as counterexamples.
So the special cases are special cases of the general case.
Relationship to the well-ordering principle   The principle of mathematical induction is usually stated as an axiom of the natural numbers; see Peano axioms .
It is strictly stronger than the well-ordering principle in the context of the other Peano axioms.
Suppose the following:  The trichotomy axiom: For any natural numbers n and m , n is less than or equal to m if and only if m is not less than n .
For any natural number n , n + 1 is greater than n .
For any natural number n , no natural number is between n and n + 1 .
No natural number is less than zero.
It can then be proved that induction, given the above-listed axioms, implies the well-ordering principle.
The following proof uses complete induction and the first and fourth axioms.
Suppose there exists a non-empty set, S , of natural numbers that has no least element.
Let P ( n ) be the assertion that n is not in S .
Then P (0) is true, for if it were false then 0 is the least element of S .
Furthermore, let n be a natural number, and suppose P ( m ) is true for all natural numbers m less than n + 1 .
Then if P ( n + 1) is false n + 1 is in S , thus being a minimal element in S , a contradiction.
Thus P ( n + 1) is true.
Therefore, by the complete induction principle, P ( n ) holds for all natural numbers n ; so S is empty, a contradiction.
Q.E.D.  "
Number line " for the set {(0, n ): n ∈ N } ∪ {(1, n ): n ∈ N } .
Numbers refer to the second component of pairs; the first can be obtained from color or location.
On the other hand, the set     {  (  0  ,  n  )  :  n  ∈   N   }  ∪  {  (  1  ,  n  )  :  n  ∈   N   }    {\displaystyle \{(0,n):n\in \mathbb {N} \}\cup \{(1,n):n\in \mathbb {N} \}}   , shown in the picture, is well-ordered  : 35lf by the lexicographic order .
Moreover, except for the induction axiom, it satisfies all Peano axioms, where Peano's constant 0 is interpreted as the pair (0, 0), and Peano's successor function is defined on pairs by succ( x , n ) = ( x , n + 1) for all     x  ∈  {  0  ,  1  }    {\displaystyle x\in \{0,1\}}   and     n  ∈   N     {\displaystyle n\in \mathbb {N} }   .
As an example for the violation of the induction axiom, define the predicate P ( x , n ) as ( x , n ) = (0, 0) or ( x , n ) = succ( y , m ) for some     y  ∈  {  0  ,  1  }    {\displaystyle y\in \{0,1\}}   and     m  ∈   N     {\displaystyle m\in \mathbb {N} }   .
Then the base case P (0, 0) is trivially true, and so is the induction step: if P ( x , n ) , then P (succ( x , n )) .
However, P is not true for all pairs in the set.
Peano's axioms with the induction principle uniquely model the natural numbers.
Replacing the induction principle with the well-ordering principle allows for more exotic models that fulfill all the axioms.
It is mistakenly printed in several books  and sources that the well-ordering principle is equivalent to the induction axiom.
In the context of the other Peano axioms, this is not the case, but in the context of other axioms, they are equivalent;  specifically, the well-ordering principle implies the induction axiom in the context of the first two above listed axioms and  Every natural number is either 0 or n + 1 for some natural number n .
A common mistake in many erroneous proofs is to assume that n − 1 is a unique and well-defined natural number, a property which is not implied by the other Peano axioms.
Sequence of numbers  Proof without words of the arithmetic progression formulas using a rotated copy of the blocks  An arithmetic progression or arithmetic sequence ( AP ) is a sequence of numbers such that the difference from any succeeding term to its preceding term remains constant throughout the sequence.
The constant difference is called common difference of that arithmetic progression.
For instance, the sequence 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, .
is an arithmetic progression with a common difference of 2.
If the initial term of an arithmetic progression is      a   1      {\displaystyle a_{1}}   and the common difference of successive members is     d    {\displaystyle d}   , then the     n    {\displaystyle n}   -th term of the sequence (      a   n      {\displaystyle a_{n}}   ) is given by:       a   n    =   a   1    +  (  n  −  1  )  d    {\displaystyle a_{n}=a_{1}+(n-1)d}    A finite portion of an arithmetic progression is called a finite arithmetic progression and sometimes just called an arithmetic progression.
The sum of a finite arithmetic progression is called an arithmetic series .
History   According to an anecdote of uncertain reliability,  young Carl Friedrich Gauss , who was in primary school, reinvented this method to compute the sum of the integers from 1 through 100, by multiplying n / 2 pairs of numbers in the sum by the values of each pair n + 1 .
However, regardless of the truth of this story, Gauss was not the first to discover this formula, and some find it likely that its origin goes back to the Pythagoreans in the 5th century BC.
Similar rules were known in antiquity to Archimedes , Hypsicles and Diophantus ;  in China to Zhang Qiujian ; in India to Aryabhata , Brahmagupta and Bhaskara II ;  and in medieval Europe to Alcuin ,   Dicuil ,   Fibonacci ,   Sacrobosco  and to anonymous commentators of Talmud known as Tosafists .
Sum      2  +  5  +  8  +  11  +  14  =  40   14  +  11  +  8  +  5  +  2  =  40      16  +  16  +  16  +  16  +  16  =  80   Computation of the sum 2 + 5 + 8 + 11 + 14.
When the sequence is reversed and added to itself term by term, the resulting sequence has a single repeated value in it, equal to the sum of the first and last numbers (2 + 14 = 16).
Thus 16 × 5 = 80 is twice the sum.
The sum of the members of a finite arithmetic progression is called an arithmetic series .
For example, consider the sum:      2  +  5  +  8  +  11  +  14  =  40    {\displaystyle 2+5+8+11+14=40}    This sum can be found quickly by taking the number n of terms being added (here 5), multiplying by the sum of the first and last number in the progression (here 2 + 14 = 16), and dividing by 2:         n  (   a   1    +   a   n    )   2      {\displaystyle {\frac {n(a_{1}+a_{n})}{2}}}    In the case above, this gives the equation:      2  +  5  +  8  +  11  +  14  =     5  (  2  +  14  )   2    =     5  ×  16   2    =  40.
{\displaystyle 2+5+8+11+14={\frac {5(2+14)}{2}}={\frac {5\times 16}{2}}=40.}
This formula works for any real numbers      a   1      {\displaystyle a_{1}}   and      a   n      {\displaystyle a_{n}}   .
For example: this       (   −    3  2     )   +   (   −    1  2     )   +    1  2    =     3   (   −    3  2    +    1  2     )    2    =  −    3  2    .
{\displaystyle \left(-{\frac {3}{2}}\right)+\left(-{\frac {1}{2}}\right)+{\frac {1}{2}}={\frac {3\left(-{\frac {3}{2}}+{\frac {1}{2}}\right)}{2}}=-{\frac {3}{2}}.}
Derivation   Animated proof for the formula giving the sum of the first integers 1+2+...+n.
To derive the above formula, begin by expressing the arithmetic series in two different ways:       S   n    =  a  +   a   2    +   a   3    +  ⋯  +   a   (  n  −  1  )    +   a   n      {\displaystyle S_{n}=a+a_{2}+a_{3}+\dots +a_{(n-1)}+a_{n}}         S   n    =  a  +  (  a  +  d  )  +  (  a  +  2  d  )  +  ⋯  +  (  a  +  (  n  −  2  )  d  )  +  (  a  +  (  n  −  1  )  d  )  .
{\displaystyle S_{n}=a+(a+d)+(a+2d)+\dots +(a+(n-2)d)+(a+(n-1)d).}
Rewriting the terms in reverse order:       S   n    =  (  a  +  (  n  −  1  )  d  )  +  (  a  +  (  n  −  2  )  d  )  +  ⋯  +  (  a  +  2  d  )  +  (  a  +  d  )  +  a  .
{\displaystyle S_{n}=(a+(n-1)d)+(a+(n-2)d)+\dots +(a+2d)+(a+d)+a.}
Adding the corresponding terms of both sides of the two equations and halving both sides:       S   n    =    n  2      .
{\displaystyle S_{n}={\frac {n}{2}}.}
This formula can be simplified as:           S   n       =    n  2      .
=    n  2    (  a  +   a   n    )  .
=    n  2    (   initial term   +   last term   )  .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}S_{n}&={\frac {n}{2}}.\\&={\frac {n}{2}}(a+a_{n}).\\&={\frac {n}{2}}({\text{initial term}}+{\text{last term}}).\end{aligned}}}    Furthermore, the mean value of the series can be calculated via:      S   n     /   n    {\displaystyle S_{n}/n}   :        a  ¯    =      a   1    +   a   n     2    .
{\displaystyle {\overline {a}}={\frac {a_{1}+a_{n}}{2}}.}
The formula is very similar to the mean of a discrete uniform distribution .
Product   The product of the members of a finite arithmetic progression with an initial element a 1 , common differences d , and n elements in total is determined in a closed expression       a   1     a   2     a   3    ⋯   a   n    =   a   1    (   a   1    +  d  )  (   a   1    +  2  d  )  .
(   a   1    +  (  n  −  1  )  d  )  =   ∏   k  =  0    n  −  1    (   a   1    +  k  d  )  =   d   n       Γ   (      a   1    d    +  n   )     Γ   (     a   1    d    )        {\displaystyle a_{1}a_{2}a_{3}\cdots a_{n}=a_{1}(a_{1}+d)(a_{1}+2d)...(a_{1}+(n-1)d)=\prod _{k=0}^{n-1}(a_{1}+kd)=d^{n}{\frac {\Gamma \left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+n\right)}{\Gamma \left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}\right)}}}    where     Γ    {\displaystyle \Gamma }   denotes the Gamma function .
The formula is not valid when      a   1     /   d    {\displaystyle a_{1}/d}   is negative or zero.
This is a generalization from the fact that the product of the progression     1  ×  2  ×  ⋯  ×  n    {\displaystyle 1\times 2\times \cdots \times n}   is given by the factorial      n  !
{\displaystyle n!}
and that the product      m  ×  (  m  +  1  )  ×  (  m  +  2  )  ×  ⋯  ×  (  n  −  2  )  ×  (  n  −  1  )  ×  n    {\displaystyle m\times (m+1)\times (m+2)\times \cdots \times (n-2)\times (n-1)\times n}    for positive integers      m    {\displaystyle m}   and     n    {\displaystyle n}   is given by         n  !
(  m  −  1  )  !
{\displaystyle {\frac {n!}{(m-1)!}}.}
Derivation            a   1     a   2     a   3    ⋯   a   n       =   ∏   k  =  0    n  −  1    (   a   1    +  k  d  )        =   ∏   k  =  0    n  −  1    d   (      a   1    d    +  k   )   =  d   (     a   1    d    )   d   (      a   1    d    +  1   )   d   (      a   1    d    +  2   )   ⋯  d   (      a   1    d    +  (  n  −  1  )   )         =   d   n     ∏   k  =  0    n  −  1     (      a   1    d    +  k   )   =   d   n       (     a   1    d    )      n  ¯           {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}a_{1}a_{2}a_{3}\cdots a_{n}&=\prod _{k=0}^{n-1}(a_{1}+kd)\\&=\prod _{k=0}^{n-1}d\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+k\right)=d\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}\right)d\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+1\right)d\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+2\right)\cdots d\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+(n-1)\right)\\&=d^{n}\prod _{k=0}^{n-1}\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+k\right)=d^{n}{\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}\right)}^{\overline {n}}\end{aligned}}}    where      x    n  ¯       {\displaystyle x^{\overline {n}}}   denotes the rising factorial .
By the recurrence formula     Γ  (  z  +  1  )  =  z  Γ  (  z  )    {\displaystyle \Gamma (z+1)=z\Gamma (z)}   , valid for a complex number      z  >  0    {\displaystyle z>0}   ,      Γ  (  z  +  2  )  =  (  z  +  1  )  Γ  (  z  +  1  )  =  (  z  +  1  )  z  Γ  (  z  )    {\displaystyle \Gamma (z+2)=(z+1)\Gamma (z+1)=(z+1)z\Gamma (z)}   ,      Γ  (  z  +  3  )  =  (  z  +  2  )  Γ  (  z  +  2  )  =  (  z  +  2  )  (  z  +  1  )  z  Γ  (  z  )    {\displaystyle \Gamma (z+3)=(z+2)\Gamma (z+2)=(z+2)(z+1)z\Gamma (z)}   ,  so that         Γ  (  z  +  m  )    Γ  (  z  )     =   ∏   k  =  0    m  −  1    (  z  +  k  )    {\displaystyle {\frac {\Gamma (z+m)}{\Gamma (z)}}=\prod _{k=0}^{m-1}(z+k)}    for     m    {\displaystyle m}   a positive integer and     z    {\displaystyle z}   a positive complex number.
Thus, if      a   1     /   d  >  0    {\displaystyle a_{1}/d>0}   ,       ∏   k  =  0    n  −  1     (      a   1    d    +  k   )   =     Γ   (      a   1    d    +  n   )     Γ   (     a   1    d    )        {\displaystyle \prod _{k=0}^{n-1}\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+k\right)={\frac {\Gamma \left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+n\right)}{\Gamma \left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}\right)}}}   ,  and, finally,       a   1     a   2     a   3    ⋯   a   n    =   d   n     ∏   k  =  0    n  −  1     (      a   1    d    +  k   )   =   d   n       Γ   (      a   1    d    +  n   )     Γ   (     a   1    d    )        {\displaystyle a_{1}a_{2}a_{3}\cdots a_{n}=d^{n}\prod _{k=0}^{n-1}\left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+k\right)=d^{n}{\frac {\Gamma \left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}+n\right)}{\Gamma \left({\frac {a_{1}}{d}}\right)}}}    Examples   Example 1  Taking the example     3  ,  8  ,  13  ,  18  ,  23  ,  28  ,  …    {\displaystyle 3,8,13,18,23,28,\ldots }   , the product of the terms of the arithmetic progression given by      a   n    =  3  +  5  (  n  −  1  )    {\displaystyle a_{n}=3+5(n-1)}   up to the 50th term is       P   50    =   5   50    ⋅     Γ   (   3   /   5  +  50   )     Γ   (   3   /   5   )      ≈  3.78438  ×   10   98    .
{\displaystyle P_{50}=5^{50}\cdot {\frac {\Gamma \left(3/5+50\right)}{\Gamma \left(3/5\right)}}\approx 3.78438\times 10^{98}.}
Example 2  The product of the first 10 odd numbers     (  1  ,  3  ,  5  ,  7  ,  9  ,  11  ,  13  ,  15  ,  17  ,  19  )    {\displaystyle (1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15,17,19)}   is given by      1  ⋅  3  ⋅  5  ⋯  19  =   ∏   k  =  0    9    (  1  +  2  k  )  =   2   10    ⋅     Γ   (     1  2    +  10   )     Γ   (    1  2    )        {\displaystyle 1\cdot 3\cdot 5\cdots 19=\prod _{k=0}^{9}(1+2k)=2^{10}\cdot {\frac {\Gamma \left({\frac {1}{2}}+10\right)}{\Gamma \left({\frac {1}{2}}\right)}}}   = 654,729,075  Standard deviation   The standard deviation of any arithmetic progression can be calculated as      σ  =   |   d   |       (  n  −  1  )  (  n  +  1  )   12       {\displaystyle \sigma =|d|{\sqrt {\frac {(n-1)(n+1)}{12}}}}    where     n    {\displaystyle n}   is the number of terms in the progression and     d    {\displaystyle d}   is the common difference between terms.
The formula is very similar to the standard deviation of a discrete uniform distribution .
Intersections   The intersection of any two doubly infinite arithmetic progressions is either empty or another arithmetic progression, which can be found using the Chinese remainder theorem .
If each pair of progressions in a family of doubly infinite arithmetic progressions have a non-empty intersection, then there exists a number common to all of them; that is, infinite arithmetic progressions form a Helly family .
However, the intersection of infinitely many infinite arithmetic progressions might be a single number rather than itself being an infinite progression.
Persian mathematician  Abū Bakr al-Karajī Diagrams from Al-Karaji's work on "hidden waters" Born 953 Karaj ,   Persia Died 1029 (aged 75–76) Nationality Persian Main interests Mathematics , Engineering   Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn al Ḥasan al-Karajī ( Persian : ابو بکر محمد بن الحسن الکرجی ; c.
953 – c.
1029) was a 10th-century Persian     mathematician and engineer who flourished at Baghdad .
He was born in Karaj ,  a city near Tehran .
His three principal surviving works are mathematical: Al-Badi' fi'l-hisab ( Wonderful on calculation ), Al-Fakhri fi'l-jabr wa'l-muqabala ( Glorious on algebra ), and Al-Kafi fi'l-hisab ( Sufficient on calculation ).
Work   Al-Karaji wrote on mathematics and engineering.
Some consider him to be merely reworking the ideas of others (he was influenced by Diophantus ) but most regard him as more original,  in particular for the beginnings of freeing algebra from geometry.
Among historians, his most widely studied work is his algebra book al-fakhri fi al-jabr wa al-muqabala , which survives from the medieval era in at least four copies.
In his book "Extraction of hidden waters" he has mentioned that earth is spherical in shape but considers it the centre of the universe long before Galileo Galilei , Johannes Kepler or Isaac Newton , but long after Aristotle and Ptolemy .
He expounded the basic principles of hydrology  and this book reveals his profound knowledge of this science and has been described as the oldest extant text in this field.
He systematically studied the algebra of exponents, and was the first to define the rules for monomials like x,x²,x³ and their reciprocals in the cases of multiplication and division.
However, since for example the product of a square and a cube would be expressed, in words rather than in numbers, as a square-cube, the numerical property of adding exponents was not clear.
His work on algebra and polynomials gave the rules for arithmetic operations for adding, subtracting and multiplying polynomials; though he was restricted to dividing polynomials by monomials.
F.
Woepcke was the first historian to realise the importance of al-Karaji's work and later historians mostly agree with his interpretation.
He praised Al-Karaji for being the first who introduced the theory of algebraic calculus.
Al-Karaji gave the first formulation of the binomial coefficients and the first description of Pascal's triangle .
He is also credited with the discovery of the binomial theorem.
In a now lost work known only from subsequent quotation by al-Samaw'al , Al-Karaji introduced the idea of argument by mathematical induction .
As Katz says Another important idea introduced by al-Karaji and continued by al-Samaw'al and others was that of an inductive argument for dealing with certain arithmetic sequences.
Algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial           1      1   1      1   2   1      1   3   3   1      1   4   6   4   1      1   5   10   10   5   1      1   6   15   20   15   6   1      1   7   21   35   35   21   7   1        {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}1\\1\quad 1\\1\quad 2\quad 1\\1\quad 3\quad 3\quad 1\\1\quad 4\quad 6\quad 4\quad 1\\1\quad 5\quad 10\quad 10\quad 5\quad 1\\1\quad 6\quad 15\quad 20\quad 15\quad 6\quad 1\\1\quad 7\quad 21\quad 35\quad 35\quad 21\quad 7\quad 1\end{array}}}   The binomial coefficient          (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   appears as the k th entry in the n th row of Pascal's triangle (where the top is the 0th row         (    0  0    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {0}{0}}}   ).
Each entry is the sum of the two above it.
In elementary algebra , the binomial theorem (or binomial expansion ) describes the algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial .
According to the theorem, it is possible to expand the polynomial ( x + y ) n into a sum involving terms of the form ax b y c , where the exponents b and c are nonnegative integers with b + c = n , and the coefficient  a of each term is a specific positive integer depending on n and b .
For example, for n = 4 ,     (  x  +  y   )   4    =   x   4    +  4   x   3    y  +  6   x   2     y   2    +  4  x   y   3    +   y   4    .
{\displaystyle (x+y)^{4}=x^{4}+4x^{3}y+6x^{2}y^{2}+4xy^{3}+y^{4}.}
The coefficient a in the term of ax b y c is known as the binomial coefficient          (    n  b    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{b}}}   or         (    n  c    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{c}}}   (the two have the same value).
These coefficients for varying n and b can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle .
These numbers also occur in combinatorics , where         (    n  b    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{b}}}   gives the number of different combinations (i.e.
subsets) of b  elements that can be chosen from an n -element set .
Therefore         (    n  b    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{b}}}   is usually pronounced as " n choose b ".
History   Special cases of the binomial theorem were known since at least the 4th century BC when Greek mathematician  Euclid mentioned the special case of the binomial theorem for exponent     n  =  2    {\displaystyle n=2}   .
Greek mathematician Diophantus cubed various binomials, including     x  −  1    {\displaystyle x-1}   .
Indian mathematician Aryabhata 's method for finding cube roots, from around 510 CE, suggests that he knew the binomial formula for exponent     n  =  3    {\displaystyle n=3}   .
Binomial coefficients, as combinatorial quantities expressing the number of ways of selecting k objects out of n without replacement, were of interest to ancient Indian mathematicians.
The earliest known reference to this combinatorial problem is the Chandaḥśāstra by the Indian lyricist Pingala (c.
200 BC), which contains a method for its solution.
: 230 The commentator Halayudha from the 10th century AD explains this method.
: 230 By the 6th century AD, the Indian mathematicians probably knew how to express this as a quotient        n  !
(  n  −  k  )  !
k  !
{\textstyle {\frac {n!}{(n-k)!k!}}}
,  and a clear statement of this rule can be found in the 12th century text Lilavati by Bhaskara .
The first known formulation of the binomial theorem and the table of binomial coefficients appears in a work by Al-Karaji , quoted by Al-Samaw'al in his "al-Bahir".
Al-Karaji described the triangular pattern of the binomial coefficients  and also provided a mathematical proof of both the binomial theorem and Pascal's triangle, using an early form of mathematical induction .
The Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam was probably familiar with the formula to higher orders, although many of his mathematical works are lost.
The binomial expansions of small degrees were known in the 13th century mathematical works of Yang Hui  and also Chu Shih-Chieh .
Yang Hui attributes the method to a much earlier 11th century text of Jia Xian , although those writings are now also lost.
: 142  In 1544, Michael Stifel introduced the term "binomial coefficient" and showed how to use them to express     (  1  +  x   )   n      {\displaystyle (1+x)^{n}}   in terms of     (  1  +  x   )   n  −  1      {\displaystyle (1+x)^{n-1}}   , via "Pascal's triangle".
Blaise Pascal studied the eponymous triangle comprehensively in his Traité du triangle arithmétique .
However, the pattern of numbers was already known to the European mathematicians of the late Renaissance, including Stifel, Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia , and Simon Stevin .
Isaac Newton is generally credited with discovering the generalized binomial theorem, valid for any real exponent, in 1665.
It was discovered independently in 1670 by James Gregory .
Statement   According to the theorem, the expansion of any nonnegative integer power n of the binomial x + y is a sum of the form     (  x  +  y   )   n    =     (    n  0    )      x   n     y   0    +     (    n  1    )      x   n  −  1     y   1    +     (    n  2    )      x   n  −  2     y   2    +  ⋯  +     (    n   n  −  1     )      x   1     y   n  −  1    +     (    n  n    )      x   0     y   n    ,    {\displaystyle (x+y)^{n}={n \choose 0}x^{n}y^{0}+{n \choose 1}x^{n-1}y^{1}+{n \choose 2}x^{n-2}y^{2}+\cdots +{n \choose n-1}x^{1}y^{n-1}+{n \choose n}x^{0}y^{n},}   where each         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   is a positive integer known as a binomial coefficient , defined as        (    n  k    )     =     n  !
=     n  (  n  −  1  )  (  n  −  2  )  ⋯  (  n  −  k  +  1  )    k  (  k  −  1  )  (  k  −  2  )  ⋯  2  ⋅  1     .
{\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k}}={\frac {n!}{k!\,(n-k)!
}}={\frac {n(n-1)(n-2)\cdots (n-k+1)}{k(k-1)(k-2)\cdots 2\cdot 1}}.}
This formula is also referred to as the binomial formula or the binomial identity .
Using summation notation , it can be written more concisely as     (  x  +  y   )   n    =   ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )      x   n  −  k     y   k    =   ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )      x   k     y   n  −  k    .
{\displaystyle (x+y)^{n}=\sum _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}x^{n-k}y^{k}=\sum _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}x^{k}y^{n-k}.}
The final expression follows from the previous one by the symmetry of x and y in the first expression, and by comparison it follows that the sequence of binomial coefficients in the formula is symmetrical,        (    n  k    )     =     (    n   n  −  k     )     .
{\textstyle {\binom {n}{k}}={\binom {n}{n-k}}.}
A simple variant of the binomial formula is obtained by substituting  1 for y , so that it involves only a single variable .
In this form, the formula reads         (  1  +  x   )   n       =     (    n  0    )      x   0    +     (    n  1    )      x   1    +     (    n  2    )      x   2    +  ⋯  +     (    n   n  −  1     )      x   n  −  1    +     (    n  n    )      x   n          =   ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )      x   k    .
      )
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(1+x)^{n}&={n \choose 0}x^{0}+{n \choose 1}x^{1}+{n \choose 2}x^{2}+\cdots +{n \choose {n-1}}x^{n-1}+{n \choose n}x^{n}\\&=\sum _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}x^{k}.
{\vphantom {\Bigg )}}\end{aligned}}}     Examples   Here are the first few cases of the binomial theorem:         (  x  +  y   )   0       =  1  ,      (  x  +  y   )   1       =  x  +  y  ,      (  x  +  y   )   2       =   x   2    +  2  x  y  +   y   2    ,      (  x  +  y   )   3       =   x   3    +  3   x   2    y  +  3  x   y   2    +   y   3    ,      (  x  +  y   )   4       =   x   4    +  4   x   3    y  +  6   x   2     y   2    +  4  x   y   3    +   y   4    ,      (  x  +  y   )   5       =   x   5    +  5   x   4    y  +  10   x   3     y   2    +  10   x   2     y   3    +  5  x   y   4    +   y   5    ,      (  x  +  y   )   6       =   x   6    +  6   x   5    y  +  15   x   4     y   2    +  20   x   3     y   3    +  15   x   2     y   4    +  6  x   y   5    +   y   6    ,      (  x  +  y   )   7       =   x   7    +  7   x   6    y  +  21   x   5     y   2    +  35   x   4     y   3    +  35   x   3     y   4    +  21   x   2     y   5    +  7  x   y   6    +   y   7    ,      (  x  +  y   )   8       =   x   8    +  8   x   7    y  +  28   x   6     y   2    +  56   x   5     y   3    +  70   x   4     y   4    +  56   x   3     y   5    +  28   x   2     y   6    +  8  x   y   7    +   y   8    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(x+y)^{0}&=1,\\(x+y)^{1}&=x+y,\\(x+y)^{2}&=x^{2}+2xy+y^{2},\\(x+y)^{3}&=x^{3}+3x^{2}y+3xy^{2}+y^{3},\\(x+y)^{4}&=x^{4}+4x^{3}y+6x^{2}y^{2}+4xy^{3}+y^{4},\\(x+y)^{5}&=x^{5}+5x^{4}y+10x^{3}y^{2}+10x^{2}y^{3}+5xy^{4}+y^{5},\\(x+y)^{6}&=x^{6}+6x^{5}y+15x^{4}y^{2}+20x^{3}y^{3}+15x^{2}y^{4}+6xy^{5}+y^{6},\\(x+y)^{7}&=x^{7}+7x^{6}y+21x^{5}y^{2}+35x^{4}y^{3}+35x^{3}y^{4}+21x^{2}y^{5}+7xy^{6}+y^{7},\\(x+y)^{8}&=x^{8}+8x^{7}y+28x^{6}y^{2}+56x^{5}y^{3}+70x^{4}y^{4}+56x^{3}y^{5}+28x^{2}y^{6}+8xy^{7}+y^{8}.\end{aligned}}}   In general, for the expansion of ( x + y ) n on the right side in the n th row (numbered so that the top row is the 0th row):  the exponents of x in the terms are n , n − 1, ..., 2, 1, 0 (the last term implicitly contains x 0 = 1 );  the exponents of y in the terms are 0, 1, 2, ..., n − 1, n (the first term implicitly contains y 0 = 1 );  the coefficients form the n th row of Pascal's triangle;  before combining like terms, there are 2 n terms x i y j in the expansion (not shown);  after combining like terms, there are n + 1 terms, and their coefficients sum to 2 n .
An example illustrating the last two points:         (  x  +  y   )   3       =  x  x  x  +  x  x  y  +  x  y  x  +  x  y  y  +  y  x  x  +  y  x  y  +  y  y  x  +  y  y  y    (   2   3     terms   )        =   x   3    +  3   x   2    y  +  3  x   y   2    +   y   3      (  3  +  1   terms   )        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(x+y)^{3}&=xxx+xxy+xyx+xyy+yxx+yxy+yyx+yyy&(2^{3}{\text{ terms}})\\&=x^{3}+3x^{2}y+3xy^{2}+y^{3}&(3+1{\text{ terms}})\end{aligned}}}   with     1  +  3  +  3  +  1  =   2   3      {\displaystyle 1+3+3+1=2^{3}}   .
A simple example with a specific positive value of y :         (  x  +  2   )   3       =   x   3    +  3   x   2    (  2  )  +  3  x  (  2   )   2    +   2   3          =   x   3    +  6   x   2    +  12  x  +  8.
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(x+2)^{3}&=x^{3}+3x^{2}(2)+3x(2)^{2}+2^{3}\\&=x^{3}+6x^{2}+12x+8.\end{aligned}}}    A simple example with a specific negative value of y :         (  x  −  2   )   3       =   x   3    −  3   x   2    (  2  )  +  3  x  (  2   )   2    −   2   3          =   x   3    −  6   x   2    +  12  x  −  8.
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(x-2)^{3}&=x^{3}-3x^{2}(2)+3x(2)^{2}-2^{3}\\&=x^{3}-6x^{2}+12x-8.\end{aligned}}}     Geometric explanation   Visualisation of binomial expansion up to the 4th power  For positive values of a and b , the binomial theorem with n = 2 is the geometrically evident fact that a square of side a + b can be cut into a square of side a , a square of side b , and two rectangles with sides a and b .
With n = 3 , the theorem states that a cube of side a + b can be cut into a cube of side a , a cube of side b , three a × a × b rectangular boxes, and three a × b × b rectangular boxes.
In calculus , this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative      (   x   n     )  ′   =  n   x   n  −  1    :    {\displaystyle (x^{n})'=nx^{n-1}:}    if one sets     a  =  x    {\displaystyle a=x}   and     b  =  Δ  x  ,    {\displaystyle b=\Delta x,}   interpreting b as an infinitesimal change in a , then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an n -dimensional hypercube ,     (  x  +  Δ  x   )   n    ,    {\displaystyle (x+\Delta x)^{n},}   where the coefficient of the linear term (in     Δ  x    {\displaystyle \Delta x}   ) is     n   x   n  −  1    ,    {\displaystyle nx^{n-1},}   the area of the n faces, each of dimension n − 1 :     (  x  +  Δ  x   )   n    =   x   n    +  n   x   n  −  1    Δ  x  +     (    n  2    )      x   n  −  2    (  Δ  x   )   2    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle (x+\Delta x)^{n}=x^{n}+nx^{n-1}\Delta x+{\binom {n}{2}}x^{n-2}(\Delta x)^{2}+\cdots .}
Substituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms,     (  Δ  x   )   2      {\displaystyle (\Delta x)^{2}}   and higher, become negligible, and yields the formula     (   x   n     )  ′   =  n   x   n  −  1    ,    {\displaystyle (x^{n})'=nx^{n-1},}   interpreted as  "the infinitesimal rate of change in volume of an n -cube as side length varies is the area of n of its ( n − 1) -dimensional faces".
If one integrates this picture, which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus , one obtains Cavalieri's quadrature formula , the integral       ∫   x   n  −  1     d  x  =     1  n      x   n        {\displaystyle \textstyle {\int x^{n-1}\,dx={\tfrac {1}{n}}x^{n}}}   – see proof of Cavalieri's quadrature formula for details.
Binomial coefficients   Main article: Binomial coefficient  The coefficients that appear in the binomial expansion are called binomial coefficients .
These are usually written         (    n  k    )      ,    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}},}   and pronounced " n choose k ".
Formulas   The coefficient of x n − k y k is given by the formula        (    n  k    )     =     n  !
,    {\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k}}={\frac {n!}{k!\;(n-k)!
}},}   which is defined in terms of the factorial function n !
Equivalently, this formula can be written        (    n  k    )     =     n  (  n  −  1  )  ⋯  (  n  −  k  +  1  )    k  (  k  −  1  )  ⋯  1     =   ∏   ℓ  =  1    k       n  −  ℓ  +  1   ℓ    =   ∏   ℓ  =  0    k  −  1       n  −  ℓ    k  −  ℓ       {\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k}}={\frac {n(n-1)\cdots (n-k+1)}{k(k-1)\cdots 1}}=\prod _{\ell =1}^{k}{\frac {n-\ell +1}{\ell }}=\prod _{\ell =0}^{k-1}{\frac {n-\ell }{k-\ell }}}   with k factors in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction .
Although this formula involves a fraction, the binomial coefficient         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   is actually an integer .
Combinatorial interpretation   The binomial coefficient         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   can be interpreted as the number of ways to choose k elements from an n -element set.
This is related to binomials for the following reason: if we write ( x + y ) n as a product      (  x  +  y  )  (  x  +  y  )  (  x  +  y  )  ⋯  (  x  +  y  )  ,    {\displaystyle (x+y)(x+y)(x+y)\cdots (x+y),}   then, according to the distributive law , there will be one term in the expansion for each choice of either x or y from each of the binomials of the product.
For example, there will only be one term x n , corresponding to choosing x from each binomial.
However, there will be several terms of the form x n −2 y 2 , one for each way of choosing exactly two binomials to contribute a y .
Therefore, after combining like terms , the coefficient of x n −2 y 2 will be equal to the number of ways to choose exactly 2 elements from an n -element set.
Proofs   Combinatorial proof   Expanding ( x + y ) n yields the sum of the 2 n products of the form e 1 e 2 ...
e n where each e i is x or y .
Rearranging factors shows that each product equals x n − k y k for some k between 0 and n .
For a given k , the following are proved equal in succession:  the number of terms equal to x n − k y k in the expansion  the number of n -character x , y strings having y in exactly k positions  the number of k -element subsets of {1, 2, ..., n }          (    n  k    )      ,    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}},}   either by definition, or by a short combinatorial argument if one is defining         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   as         n  !
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {n!}{k!(n-k)!}}.}
This proves the binomial theorem.
Example   The coefficient of xy 2 in         (  x  +  y   )   3       =  (  x  +  y  )  (  x  +  y  )  (  x  +  y  )        =  x  x  x  +  x  x  y  +  x  y  x  +     x  y  y   _    +  y  x  x  +     y  x  y   _    +     y  y  x   _    +  y  y  y        =   x   3    +  3   x   2    y  +     3  x   y   2     _    +   y   3          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(x+y)^{3}&=(x+y)(x+y)(x+y)\\&=xxx+xxy+xyx+{\underline {xyy}}+yxx+{\underline {yxy}}+{\underline {yyx}}+yyy\\&=x^{3}+3x^{2}y+{\underline {3xy^{2}}}+y^{3}\end{aligned}}}   equals         (    3  2    )      =  3    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {3}{2}}=3}   because there are three x , y strings of length 3 with exactly two y 's, namely,     x  y  y  ,   y  x  y  ,   y  y  x  ,    {\displaystyle xyy,\;yxy,\;yyx,}   corresponding to the three 2-element subsets of {1, 2, 3} , namely,     {  2  ,  3  }  ,   {  1  ,  3  }  ,   {  1  ,  2  }  ,    {\displaystyle \{2,3\},\;\{1,3\},\;\{1,2\},}   where each subset specifies the positions of the y in a corresponding string.
Inductive proof   Induction yields another proof of the binomial theorem.
When n = 0 , both sides equal 1 , since x 0 = 1 and         (    0  0    )      =  1.
{\displaystyle {\tbinom {0}{0}}=1.}
Now suppose that the equality holds for a given n ; we will prove it for n + 1 .
For j , k ≥ 0 , let  j , k denote the coefficient of x j y k in the polynomial f ( x , y ) .
By the inductive hypothesis, ( x + y ) n is a polynomial in x and y such that  j , k is         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   if j + k = n , and 0 otherwise.
The identity     (  x  +  y   )   n  +  1    =  x  (  x  +  y   )   n    +  y  (  x  +  y   )   n      {\displaystyle (x+y)^{n+1}=x(x+y)^{n}+y(x+y)^{n}}   shows that ( x + y ) n +1 is also a polynomial in x and y , and        j  ,  k    =     j  −  1  ,  k    +     j  ,  k  −  1    ,    {\displaystyle _{j,k}=_{j-1,k}+_{j,k-1},}   since if j + k = n + 1 , then ( j − 1) + k = n and j + ( k − 1) = n .
Now, the right hand side is        (    n  k    )     +     (    n   k  −  1     )     =     (     n  +  1   k    )     ,    {\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k}}+{\binom {n}{k-1}}={\binom {n+1}{k}},}   by Pascal's identity .
On the other hand, if j + k ≠ n + 1 , then ( j – 1) + k ≠ n and j + ( k – 1) ≠ n , so we get 0 + 0 = 0 .
Thus     (  x  +  y   )   n  +  1    =   ∑   k  =  0    n  +  1       (     n  +  1   k    )      x   n  +  1  −  k     y   k    ,    {\displaystyle (x+y)^{n+1}=\sum _{k=0}^{n+1}{\binom {n+1}{k}}x^{n+1-k}y^{k},}   which is the inductive hypothesis with n + 1 substituted for n and so completes the inductive step.
Generalizations   Newton's generalized binomial theorem   Main article: Binomial series  Around 1665, Isaac Newton generalized the binomial theorem to allow real exponents other than nonnegative integers.
(The same generalization also applies to complex exponents.)
In this generalization, the finite sum is replaced by an infinite series .
In order to do this, one needs to give meaning to binomial coefficients with an arbitrary upper index, which cannot be done using the usual formula with factorials.
However, for an arbitrary number r , one can define        (    r  k    )     =     r  (  r  −  1  )  ⋯  (  r  −  k  +  1  )    k  !
=     (  r   )   k      k  !
,    {\displaystyle {r \choose k}={\frac {r(r-1)\cdots (r-k+1)}{k!
}}={\frac {(r)_{k}}{k!
}},}   where     (  ⋅   )   k      {\displaystyle (\cdot )_{k}}   is the Pochhammer symbol , here standing for a falling factorial .
This agrees with the usual definitions when r is a nonnegative integer.
Then, if x and y are real numbers with | x | > | y | ,  and r is any complex number, one has         (  x  +  y   )   r       =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (    r  k    )      x   r  −  k     y   k          =   x   r    +  r   x   r  −  1    y  +     r  (  r  −  1  )    2  !
x   r  −  2     y   2    +     r  (  r  −  1  )  (  r  −  2  )    3  !
x   r  −  3     y   3    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(x+y)^{r}&=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{r \choose k}x^{r-k}y^{k}\\&=x^{r}+rx^{r-1}y+{\frac {r(r-1)}{2!
}}x^{r-2}y^{2}+{\frac {r(r-1)(r-2)}{3!
}}x^{r-3}y^{3}+\cdots .\end{aligned}}}    When r is a nonnegative integer, the binomial coefficients for k > r are zero, so this equation reduces to the usual binomial theorem, and there are at most r + 1 nonzero terms.
For other values of r , the series typically has infinitely many nonzero terms.
For example, r = 1/2 gives the following series for the square root:       1  +  x    =  1  +    1  2    x  −    1  8     x   2    +    1  16     x   3    −    5  128     x   4    +    7  256     x   5    −  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {1+x}}=1+{\frac {1}{2}}x-{\frac {1}{8}}x^{2}+{\frac {1}{16}}x^{3}-{\frac {5}{128}}x^{4}+{\frac {7}{256}}x^{5}-\cdots .}
Taking r = −1 , the generalized binomial series gives the geometric series formula , valid for | x | < 1 :     (  1  +  x   )   −  1    =    1   1  +  x     =  1  −  x  +   x   2    −   x   3    +   x   4    −   x   5    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle (1+x)^{-1}={\frac {1}{1+x}}=1-x+x^{2}-x^{3}+x^{4}-x^{5}+\cdots .}
More generally, with r = − s , we have for | x | < 1 :         1   (  1  +  x   )   s       =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (     −  s   k    )      x   k    =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (     s  +  k  −  1   k    )     (  −  1   )   k     x   k    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{(1+x)^{s}}}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{-s \choose k}x^{k}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{s+k-1 \choose k}(-1)^{k}x^{k}.}
So, for instance, when s = 1/2 ,       1   1  +  x     =  1  −    1  2    x  +    3  8     x   2    −    5  16     x   3    +    35  128     x   4    −    63  256     x   5    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\sqrt {1+x}}}=1-{\frac {1}{2}}x+{\frac {3}{8}}x^{2}-{\frac {5}{16}}x^{3}+{\frac {35}{128}}x^{4}-{\frac {63}{256}}x^{5}+\cdots .}
Replacing x with -x yields:       1   (  1  −  x   )   s       =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (     s  +  k  −  1   k    )     (  −  1   )   k    (  −  x   )   k    =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞       (     s  +  k  −  1   k    )      x   k    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{(1-x)^{s}}}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{s+k-1 \choose k}(-1)^{k}(-x)^{k}=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{s+k-1 \choose k}x^{k}.}
So, for instance, when s = 1/2 , we have for | x | < 1 :       1   1  −  x     =  1  +    1  2    x  +    3  8     x   2    +    5  16     x   3    +    35  128     x   4    +    63  256     x   5    +  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\sqrt {1-x}}}=1+{\frac {1}{2}}x+{\frac {3}{8}}x^{2}+{\frac {5}{16}}x^{3}+{\frac {35}{128}}x^{4}+{\frac {63}{256}}x^{5}+\cdots .}
Further generalizations   The generalized binomial theorem can be extended to the case where x and y are complex numbers.
For this version, one should again assume | x | > | y |  and define the powers of x + y and x using a holomorphic  branch of log defined on an open disk of radius | x | centered at x .
The generalized binomial theorem is valid also for elements x and y of a Banach algebra as long as xy = yx , and x is invertible, and ‖ y / x ‖ < 1 .
A version of the binomial theorem is valid for the following Pochhammer symbol -like family of polynomials: for a given real constant c , define      x   (  0  )    =  1    {\displaystyle x^{(0)}=1}   and      x   (  n  )    =   ∏   k  =  1    n        {\displaystyle x^{(n)}=\prod _{k=1}^{n}}   for     n  >  0.
{\displaystyle n>0.}
Then       (  a  +  b   )   (  n  )    =   ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )      a   (  n  −  k  )     b   (  k  )    .
{\displaystyle (a+b)^{(n)}=\sum _{k=0}^{n}{\binom {n}{k}}a^{(n-k)}b^{(k)}.}
The case c = 0 recovers the usual binomial theorem.
More generally, a sequence     {   p   n     }   n  =  0    ∞      {\displaystyle \{p_{n}\}_{n=0}^{\infty }}   of polynomials is said to be of binomial type if      deg  ⁡   p   n    =  n    {\displaystyle \deg p_{n}=n}   for all     n    {\displaystyle n}   ,       p   0    (  0  )  =  1    {\displaystyle p_{0}(0)=1}   , and       p   n    (  x  +  y  )  =   ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )      p   k    (  x  )   p   n  −  k    (  y  )    {\displaystyle p_{n}(x+y)=\sum _{k=0}^{n}{\binom {n}{k}}p_{k}(x)p_{n-k}(y)}   for all     x    {\displaystyle x}   ,     y    {\displaystyle y}   , and     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
An operator     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   on the space of polynomials is said to be the basis operator of the sequence     {   p   n     }   n  =  0    ∞      {\displaystyle \{p_{n}\}_{n=0}^{\infty }}   if     Q   p   0    =  0    {\displaystyle Qp_{0}=0}   and     Q   p   n    =  n   p   n  −  1      {\displaystyle Qp_{n}=np_{n-1}}   for all     n  ⩾  1    {\displaystyle n\geqslant 1}   .
A sequence     {   p   n     }   n  =  0    ∞      {\displaystyle \{p_{n}\}_{n=0}^{\infty }}   is binomial if and only if its basis operator is a Delta operator .
Writing      E   a      {\displaystyle E^{a}}   for the shift by     a    {\displaystyle a}   operator, the Delta operators corresponding to the above "Pochhammer" families of polynomials are the backward difference     I  −   E   −  c      {\displaystyle I-E^{-c}}   for     c  >  0    {\displaystyle c>0}   , the ordinary derivative for     c  =  0    {\displaystyle c=0}   , and the forward difference      E   −  c    −  I    {\displaystyle E^{-c}-I}   for     c  <  0    {\displaystyle c<0}   .
Multinomial theorem   Main article: Multinomial theorem  The binomial theorem can be generalized to include powers of sums with more than two terms.
The general version is     (   x   1    +   x   2    +  ⋯  +   x   m     )   n    =   ∑    k   1    +   k   2    +  ⋯  +   k   m    =  n       (    n    k   1    ,   k   2    ,  …  ,   k   m       )      x   1     k   1       x   2     k   2      ⋯   x   m     k   m      ,    {\displaystyle (x_{1}+x_{2}+\cdots +x_{m})^{n}=\sum _{k_{1}+k_{2}+\cdots +k_{m}=n}{\binom {n}{k_{1},k_{2},\ldots ,k_{m}}}x_{1}^{k_{1}}x_{2}^{k_{2}}\cdots x_{m}^{k_{m}},}    where the summation is taken over all sequences of nonnegative integer indices k 1 through k m such that the sum of all k i is n .
(For each term in the expansion, the exponents must add up to n ).
The coefficients         (    n    k   1    ,  ⋯  ,   k   m       )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k_{1},\cdots ,k_{m}}}}   are known as multinomial coefficients, and can be computed by the formula        (    n    k   1    ,   k   2    ,  …  ,   k   m       )     =     n  !
k   1    !
⋅   k   2    !
⋯   k   m    !
{\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k_{1},k_{2},\ldots ,k_{m}}}={\frac {n!
}{k_{1}!\cdot k_{2}!\cdots k_{m}!}}.}
Combinatorially, the multinomial coefficient         (    n    k   1    ,  ⋯  ,   k   m       )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k_{1},\cdots ,k_{m}}}}   counts the number of different ways to partition an n -element set into disjoint  subsets of sizes k 1 , ..., k m .
Multi-binomial theorem   When working in more dimensions, it is often useful to deal with products of binomial expressions.
By the binomial theorem this is equal to     (   x   1    +   y   1     )    n   1      ⋯  (   x   d    +   y   d     )    n   d      =   ∑    k   1    =  0     n   1      ⋯   ∑    k   d    =  0     n   d         (     n   1     k   1      )      x   1     k   1       y   1     n   1    −   k   1      …     (     n   d     k   d      )      x   d     k   d       y   d     n   d    −   k   d      .
{\displaystyle (x_{1}+y_{1})^{n_{1}}\dotsm (x_{d}+y_{d})^{n_{d}}=\sum _{k_{1}=0}^{n_{1}}\dotsm \sum _{k_{d}=0}^{n_{d}}{\binom {n_{1}}{k_{1}}}x_{1}^{k_{1}}y_{1}^{n_{1}-k_{1}}\dotsc {\binom {n_{d}}{k_{d}}}x_{d}^{k_{d}}y_{d}^{n_{d}-k_{d}}.}
This may be written more concisely, by multi-index notation , as     (  x  +  y   )   α    =   ∑   ν  ≤  α       (    α  ν    )      x   ν     y   α  −  ν    .
{\displaystyle (x+y)^{\alpha }=\sum _{\nu \leq \alpha }{\binom {\alpha }{\nu }}x^{\nu }y^{\alpha -\nu }.}
General Leibniz rule   Main article: General Leibniz rule  The general Leibniz rule gives the n th derivative of a product of two functions in a form similar to that of the binomial theorem:       (  f  g   )   (  n  )    (  x  )  =   ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )      f   (  n  −  k  )    (  x  )   g   (  k  )    (  x  )  .
{\displaystyle (fg)^{(n)}(x)=\sum _{k=0}^{n}{\binom {n}{k}}f^{(n-k)}(x)g^{(k)}(x).}
Here, the superscript ( n ) indicates the n th derivative of a function,      f   (  n  )    (  x  )  =      d   n     d   x   n        f  (  x  )    {\displaystyle f^{(n)}(x)={\tfrac {d^{n}}{dx^{n}}}f(x)}   .
If one sets f ( x ) = e ax and g ( x ) = e bx , cancelling the common factor of e ( a + b ) x from each term gives the ordinary binomial theorem.
Applications   Multiple-angle identities   For the complex numbers the binomial theorem can be combined with de Moivre's formula to yield multiple-angle formulas for the sine and cosine .
According to De Moivre's formula,     cos  ⁡   (   n  x   )   +  i  sin  ⁡   (   n  x   )   =    (   cos  ⁡  x  +  i  sin  ⁡  x   )    n    .
{\displaystyle \cos \left(nx\right)+i\sin \left(nx\right)=\left(\cos x+i\sin x\right)^{n}.}
Using the binomial theorem, the expression on the right can be expanded, and then the real and imaginary parts can be taken to yield formulas for cos( nx ) and sin( nx ) .
For example, since       (   cos  ⁡  x  +  i  sin  ⁡  x   )    2    =   cos   2    ⁡  x  +  2  i  cos  ⁡  x  sin  ⁡  x  −   sin   2    ⁡  x  =  (   cos   2    ⁡  x  −   sin   2    ⁡  x  )  +  i  (  2  cos  ⁡  x  sin  ⁡  x  )  ,    {\displaystyle \left(\cos x+i\sin x\right)^{2}=\cos ^{2}x+2i\cos x\sin x-\sin ^{2}x=(\cos ^{2}x-\sin ^{2}x)+i(2\cos x\sin x),}   But De Moivre's formula identifies the left side with     (  cos  ⁡  x  +  i  sin  ⁡  x   )   2    =  cos  ⁡  (  2  x  )  +  i  sin  ⁡  (  2  x  )    {\displaystyle (\cos x+i\sin x)^{2}=\cos(2x)+i\sin(2x)}   , so     cos  ⁡  (  2  x  )  =   cos   2    ⁡  x  −   sin   2    ⁡  x    and    sin  ⁡  (  2  x  )  =  2  cos  ⁡  x  sin  ⁡  x  ,    {\displaystyle \cos(2x)=\cos ^{2}x-\sin ^{2}x\quad {\text{and}}\quad \sin(2x)=2\cos x\sin x,}   which are the usual double-angle identities.
Similarly, since       (   cos  ⁡  x  +  i  sin  ⁡  x   )    3    =   cos   3    ⁡  x  +  3  i   cos   2    ⁡  x  sin  ⁡  x  −  3  cos  ⁡  x   sin   2    ⁡  x  −  i   sin   3    ⁡  x  ,    {\displaystyle \left(\cos x+i\sin x\right)^{3}=\cos ^{3}x+3i\cos ^{2}x\sin x-3\cos x\sin ^{2}x-i\sin ^{3}x,}   De Moivre's formula yields     cos  ⁡  (  3  x  )  =   cos   3    ⁡  x  −  3  cos  ⁡  x   sin   2    ⁡  x    and    sin  ⁡  (  3  x  )  =  3   cos   2    ⁡  x  sin  ⁡  x  −   sin   3    ⁡  x  .
{\displaystyle \cos(3x)=\cos ^{3}x-3\cos x\sin ^{2}x\quad {\text{and}}\quad \sin(3x)=3\cos ^{2}x\sin x-\sin ^{3}x.}
In general,     cos  ⁡  (  n  x  )  =   ∑   k   even     (  −  1   )   k   /   2       (    n  k    )      cos   n  −  k    ⁡  x   sin   k    ⁡  x    {\displaystyle \cos(nx)=\sum _{k{\text{ even}}}(-1)^{k/2}{n \choose k}\cos ^{n-k}x\sin ^{k}x}   and     sin  ⁡  (  n  x  )  =   ∑   k   odd     (  −  1   )   (  k  −  1  )   /   2       (    n  k    )      cos   n  −  k    ⁡  x   sin   k    ⁡  x  .
{\displaystyle \sin(nx)=\sum _{k{\text{ odd}}}(-1)^{(k-1)/2}{n \choose k}\cos ^{n-k}x\sin ^{k}x.}
There are also similar formulas using Chebyshev polynomials .
Series for e   The number e is often defined by the formula     e  =   lim   n  →  ∞      (   1  +    1  n     )    n    .
{\displaystyle e=\lim _{n\to \infty }\left(1+{\frac {1}{n}}\right)^{n}.}
Applying the binomial theorem to this expression yields the usual infinite series for e .
In particular:       (   1  +    1  n     )    n    =  1  +     (    n  1    )       1  n    +     (    n  2    )       1   n   2      +     (    n  3    )       1   n   3      +  ⋯  +     (    n  n    )       1   n   n      .
{\displaystyle \left(1+{\frac {1}{n}}\right)^{n}=1+{n \choose 1}{\frac {1}{n}}+{n \choose 2}{\frac {1}{n^{2}}}+{n \choose 3}{\frac {1}{n^{3}}}+\cdots +{n \choose n}{\frac {1}{n^{n}}}.}
The k th term of this sum is        (    n  k    )       1   n   k      =    1   k  !
⋅     n  (  n  −  1  )  (  n  −  2  )  ⋯  (  n  −  k  +  1  )    n   k        {\displaystyle {n \choose k}{\frac {1}{n^{k}}}={\frac {1}{k!
}}\cdot {\frac {n(n-1)(n-2)\cdots (n-k+1)}{n^{k}}}}    As n → ∞ , the rational expression on the right approaches 1 , and therefore      lim   n  →  ∞       (    n  k    )       1   n   k      =    1   k  !
{\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }{n \choose k}{\frac {1}{n^{k}}}={\frac {1}{k!}}.}
This indicates that e can be written as a series:     e  =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞      1   k  !
=    1   0  !
+    1   1  !
+    1   2  !
+    1   3  !
+  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle e=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{k!
}}={\frac {1}{0!
}}+{\frac {1}{1!
}}+{\frac {1}{2!
}}+{\frac {1}{3!
}}+\cdots .}
Indeed, since each term of the binomial expansion is an increasing function of n , it follows from the monotone convergence theorem for series that the sum of this infinite series is equal to e .
Probability   The binomial theorem is closely related to the probability mass function of the negative binomial distribution .
The probability of a (countable) collection of independent Bernoulli trials     {   X   t     }   t  ∈  S      {\displaystyle \{X_{t}\}_{t\in S}}   with probability of success     p  ∈      {\displaystyle p\in }   all not happening is      P   (    ⋂   t  ∈  S     X   t    C     )   =  (  1  −  p   )    |   S   |     =   ∑   n  =  0     |   S   |        (      |   S   |    n    )     (  −  p   )   n    .
{\displaystyle P\left(\bigcap _{t\in S}X_{t}^{C}\right)=(1-p)^{|S|}=\sum _{n=0}^{|S|}{|S| \choose n}(-p)^{n}.}
An upper bound for this quantity is      e   −  p   |   S   |     .
{\displaystyle e^{-p|S|}.}
In abstract algebra   The binomial theorem is valid more generally for two elements x and y in a ring , or even a semiring , provided that xy = yx .
For example, it holds for two n × n matrices, provided that those matrices commute; this is useful in computing powers of a matrix.
The binomial theorem can be stated by saying that the polynomial sequence  {1, x , x 2 , x 3 , ...} is of binomial type .
In popular culture   The binomial theorem is mentioned in the Major-General's Song in the comic opera The Pirates of Penzance .
Professor Moriarty is described by Sherlock Holmes as having written a treatise on the binomial theorem .
The Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa , using the heteronym Álvaro de Campos , wrote that "Newton's Binomial is as beautiful as the Venus de Milo .
The truth is that few people notice it."
In the 2014 film The Imitation Game , Alan Turing makes reference to Isaac Newton's work on the binomial theorem during his first meeting with Commander Denniston at Bletchley Park.
Triangular array of the binomial coefficients in mathematics           1      1   1      1   2   1      1   3   3   1      1   4   6   4   1      1   5   10   10   5   1      1   6   15   20   15   6   1      1   7   21   35   35   21   7   1        {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}1\\1\quad 1\\1\quad 2\quad 1\\1\quad 3\quad 3\quad 1\\1\quad 4\quad 6\quad 4\quad 1\\1\quad 5\quad 10\quad 10\quad 5\quad 1\\1\quad 6\quad 15\quad 20\quad 15\quad 6\quad 1\\1\quad 7\quad 21\quad 35\quad 35\quad 21\quad 7\quad 1\end{array}}}   A diagram showing the first eight rows of Pascal's triangle.
In mathematics , Pascal's triangle is a triangular array of the binomial coefficients arising in probability theory, combinatorics, and algebra.
In much of the Western world , it is named after the French mathematician Blaise Pascal , although other mathematicians studied it centuries before him in Persia,  India,  China, Germany, and Italy.
The rows of Pascal's triangle are conventionally enumerated starting with row     n  =  0    {\displaystyle n=0}   at the top (the 0th row).
The entries in each row are numbered from the left beginning with     k  =  0    {\displaystyle k=0}   and are usually staggered relative to the numbers in the adjacent rows.
The triangle may be constructed in the following manner: In row 0 (the topmost row), there is a unique nonzero entry 1.
Each entry of each subsequent row is constructed by adding the number above and to the left with the number above and to the right, treating blank entries as 0.
For example, the initial number of row 1 (or any other row) is 1 (the sum of 0 and 1), whereas the numbers 1 and 3 in row 3 are added to produce the number 4 in row 4.
Formula   In Pascal's triangle, each number is the sum of the two numbers directly above it.
The entry in the     n    {\displaystyle n}   th row and     k    {\displaystyle k}   th column of Pascal's triangle is denoted        (    n  k    )       {\displaystyle {n \choose k}}   .
For example, the unique nonzero entry in the topmost row is        (    0  0    )     =  1    {\displaystyle {0 \choose 0}=1}   .
With this notation, the construction of the previous paragraph may be written as follows:        (    n  k    )     =     (     n  −  1    k  −  1     )     +     (     n  −  1   k    )       {\displaystyle {n \choose k}={n-1 \choose k-1}+{n-1 \choose k}}   ,  for any non-negative integer     n    {\displaystyle n}   and any integer     0  ≤  k  ≤  n    {\displaystyle 0\leq k\leq n}   .
This recurrence for the binomial coefficients is known as Pascal's rule .
History   Yang Hui 's triangle, as depicted by the Chinese using rod numerals , appears in Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns , a mathematical work by Zhu Shijie , dated 1303.
Pascal 's version of the triangle  The pattern of numbers that forms Pascal's triangle was known well before Pascal's time.
The earliest known reference with a method for finding binomial coefficients is the Chandaḥśāstra by the Indian lyricist Pingala (c.
200 BC).
By the 6th century AD, the Indian mathematicians probably knew how to express this as a quotient, and in 10th century CE, Halyudha Bhatt arranged them in the Meru Prastara (steps of the cosmic Mountain).
The Persian mathematician Al-Karaji (953–1029) wrote a now-lost book which contained the first formulation of the binomial coefficients and the first description of Pascal's triangle.
It was later repeated by Omar Khayyám (1048–1131), another Persian mathematician; thus the triangle is also referred to as the Khayyam's triangle ( مثلث خیام ) in Iran.
Several theorems related to the triangle were known, including the binomial theorem .
Khayyam used a method of finding n th roots based on the binomial expansion, and therefore on the binomial coefficients.
Pascal's triangle was known in China during the early 11th century as a result of the work of the Chinese mathematician Jia Xian (1010–1070).
During the 13th century, Yang Hui (1238–1298) presented the triangle and hence it is still known as Yang Hui's triangle ( 杨辉三角 ; 楊輝三角 ) in China.
In Europe, Pascal's triangle appeared for the first time in the Arithmetic of Jordanus de Nemore (13th century).
The binomial coefficients were calculated by Gersonides during the early 14th century, using the multiplicative formula for them.
Petrus Apianus (1495–1552) published the full triangle on the frontispiece of his book on business calculations in 1527.
Michael Stifel published a portion of the triangle (from the second to the middle column in each row) in 1544, describing it as a table of figurate numbers .
In Italy, Pascal's triangle is referred to as Tartaglia's triangle , named for the Italian algebraist Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia (1500–1577), who published six rows of the triangle in 1556.
Gerolamo Cardano , also, published the triangle as well as the additive and multiplicative rules for constructing it in 1570.
Pascal's Traité du triangle arithmétique ( Treatise on Arithmetical Triangle ) was published posthumously in 1665.
In this, Pascal collected several results then known about the triangle, and employed them to solve problems in probability theory .
The triangle was later named for Pascal by Pierre Raymond de Montmort (1708) who called it "Table de M.
Pascal pour les combinaisons" (French: Mr. Pascal's table for combinations) and Abraham de Moivre (1730) who called it "Triangulum Arithmeticum PASCALIANUM" (Latin: Pascal's Arithmetic Triangle), which became the basis of the modern Western name.
Binomial expansions   Visualisation of binomial expansion up to the 4th power  Pascal's triangle determines the coefficients which arise in binomial expansions .
For example, consider the expansion     (  x  +  y   )   2    =   x   2    +  2  x  y  +   y   2    =   1    x   2     y   0    +   2    x   1     y   1    +   1    x   0     y   2      {\displaystyle (x+y)^{2}=x^{2}+2xy+y^{2}=\mathbf {1} x^{2}y^{0}+\mathbf {2} x^{1}y^{1}+\mathbf {1} x^{0}y^{2}}   .
The coefficients are the numbers in the second row of Pascal's triangle:        (    2  0    )     =  1    {\displaystyle {2 \choose 0}=1}   ,        (    2  1    )     =  2    {\displaystyle {2 \choose 1}=2}   ,        (    2  2    )     =  1    {\displaystyle {2 \choose 2}=1}   .
In general, when a binomial like     x  +  y    {\displaystyle x+y}   is raised to a positive integer power of     n    {\displaystyle n}   , the expression expands into:     (  x  +  y   )   n    =   ∑   k  =  0    n     a   k     x   n  −  k     y   k    =   a   0     x   n    +   a   1     x   n  −  1    y  +   a   2     x   n  −  2     y   2    +  …  +   a   n  −  1    x   y   n  −  1    +   a   n     y   n      {\displaystyle (x+y)^{n}=\sum _{k=0}^{n}a_{k}x^{n-k}y^{k}=a_{0}x^{n}+a_{1}x^{n-1}y+a_{2}x^{n-2}y^{2}+\ldots +a_{n-1}xy^{n-1}+a_{n}y^{n}}   , where the coefficients      a   k      {\displaystyle a_{k}}   in this expansion are precisely the numbers on row     n    {\displaystyle n}   of Pascal's triangle.
In other words,       a   k    =     (    n  k    )       {\displaystyle a_{k}={n \choose k}}   .
This is the binomial theorem .
The entire right diagonal of Pascal's triangle corresponds to the coefficient of      y   n      {\displaystyle y^{n}}   in these binomial expansions, while the next diagonal corresponds to the coefficient of     x   y   n  −  1      {\displaystyle xy^{n-1}}   and so on.
To see how the binomial theorem relates to the simple construction of Pascal's triangle, consider the problem of calculating the coefficients of the expansion of     (  x  +  y   )   n  +  1      {\displaystyle (x+y)^{n+1}}   in terms of the corresponding coefficients of     (  x  +  1   )   n      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n}}   (setting     y  =  1    {\displaystyle y=1}   for simplicity).
Suppose then that      (  x  +  1   )   n    =   ∑   k  =  0    n     a   k     x   k      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n}=\sum _{k=0}^{n}a_{k}x^{k}}   .
Now      (  x  +  1   )   n  +  1    =  (  x  +  1  )  (  x  +  1   )   n    =  x  (  x  +  1   )   n    +  (  x  +  1   )   n    =   ∑   i  =  0    n     a   i     x   i  +  1    +   ∑   i  =  0    n     a   i     x   i    .
{\displaystyle (x+1)^{n+1}=(x+1)(x+1)^{n}=x(x+1)^{n}+(x+1)^{n}=\sum _{i=0}^{n}a_{i}x^{i+1}+\sum _{i=0}^{n}a_{i}x^{i}.}
(    0  0    )              (    1  0    )           (    1  1    )              (    2  0    )           (    2  1    )           (    2  2    )              (    3  0    )           (    3  1    )           (    3  2    )           (    3  3    )              (    4  0    )           (    4  1    )           (    4  2    )           (    4  3    )           (    4  4    )              (    5  0    )           (    5  1    )           (    5  2    )           (    5  3    )           (    5  4    )           (    5  5    )            {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}{\dbinom {0}{0}}\\{\dbinom {1}{0}}\quad {\dbinom {1}{1}}\\{\dbinom {2}{0}}\quad {\dbinom {2}{1}}\quad {\dbinom {2}{2}}\\{\dbinom {3}{0}}\quad {\dbinom {3}{1}}\quad {\dbinom {3}{2}}\quad {\dbinom {3}{3}}\\{\dbinom {4}{0}}\quad {\dbinom {4}{1}}\quad {\dbinom {4}{2}}\quad {\dbinom {4}{3}}\quad {\dbinom {4}{4}}\\{\dbinom {5}{0}}\quad {\dbinom {5}{1}}\quad {\dbinom {5}{2}}\quad {\dbinom {5}{3}}\quad {\dbinom {5}{4}}\quad {\dbinom {5}{5}}\end{array}}}   Six rows Pascal's triangle as binomial coefficients  The two summations can be reorganized as follows:           ∑   k  =  0    n     a   k     x   k  +  1    +   ∑   k  =  0    n     a   k     x   k       =   ∑   k  =  1    n  +  1     a   k  −  1     x   k    +   ∑   k  =  0    n     a   k     x   k          =   ∑   k  =  1    n     a   k  −  1     x   k    +   ∑   k  =  1    n     a   k     x   k    +   a   0     x   0    +   a   n     x   n  +  1          =   ∑   k  =  1    n    (   a   k  −  1    +   a   k    )   x   k    +   a   0     x   0    +   a   n     x   n  +  1          =   ∑   k  =  1    n    (   a   k  −  1    +   a   k    )   x   k    +   x   0    +   x   n  +  1          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\sum _{k=0}^{n}a_{k}x^{k+1}+\sum _{k=0}^{n}a_{k}x^{k}&=\sum _{k=1}^{n+1}a_{k-1}x^{k}+\sum _{k=0}^{n}a_{k}x^{k}\\&=\sum _{k=1}^{n}a_{k-1}x^{k}+\sum _{k=1}^{n}a_{k}x^{k}+a_{0}x^{0}+a_{n}x^{n+1}\\&=\sum _{k=1}^{n}(a_{k-1}+a_{k})x^{k}+a_{0}x^{0}+a_{n}x^{n+1}\\&=\sum _{k=1}^{n}(a_{k-1}+a_{k})x^{k}+x^{0}+x^{n+1}\end{aligned}}}    (because of how raising a polynomial to a power works,      a   0    =   a   n    =  1    {\displaystyle a_{0}=a_{n}=1}   ).
The found expression for the polynomial     (  x  +  1   )   n  +  1      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n+1}}   in terms of the coefficients of     (  x  +  1   )   n      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n}}   (these are the      a   k      {\displaystyle a_{k}}   s) is needed to express a line in terms of the line above it.
Recall that all the terms in a diagonal going from the upper-left to the lower-right correspond to the same power of     x    {\displaystyle x}   , and that the     a    {\displaystyle a}   -terms are the coefficients of the polynomial     (  x  +  1   )   n      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n}}   , and the goal is determining the coefficients of     (  x  +  1   )   n  +  1      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n+1}}   .
Now, for any given     0  <  k  <  n  +  1    {\displaystyle 0<k<n+1}   , the coefficient of the      x   k      {\displaystyle x^{k}}   term in the polynomial     (  x  +  1   )   n  +  1      {\displaystyle (x+1)^{n+1}}   is equal to      a   k  −  1    +   a   k      {\displaystyle a_{k-1}+a_{k}}   .
This is indeed the simple rule for constructing Pascal's triangle row-by-row.
It is not difficult to turn this argument into a proof (by mathematical induction ) of the binomial theorem.
Since     (  a  +  b   )   n    =   b   n      (     a  b    +  1   )    n      {\displaystyle (a+b)^{n}=b^{n}\left({\frac {a}{b}}+1\right)^{n}}   , the coefficients are identical in the expansion of the general case.
An interesting consequence of the binomial theorem is obtained by setting both variables     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   equal to one.
In this case, it is known that     (  1  +  1   )   n    =   2   n      {\displaystyle (1+1)^{n}=2^{n}}   , and so       ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )     =     (    n  0    )     +     (    n  1    )     +  ⋯  +     (    n   n  −  1     )     +     (    n  n    )     =   2   n    .
{\displaystyle \sum _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}={n \choose 0}+{n \choose 1}+\cdots +{n \choose n-1}+{n \choose n}=2^{n}.}
In other words, the sum of the entries in the     n    {\displaystyle n}   th row of Pascal's triangle is the     n    {\displaystyle n}   th power of 2.
This is equivalent to the statement that the number of subsets (the cardinality of the power set ) of an     n    {\displaystyle n}   -element set is      2   n      {\displaystyle 2^{n}}   , as can be seen by observing that the number of subsets is the sum of the number of combinations of each of the possible lengths, which range from zero through to     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Combinations   A second useful application of Pascal's triangle is in the calculation of combinations .
For example, the number of combinations of     n    {\displaystyle n}   items taken     k    {\displaystyle k}   at a time (pronounced n choose k ) can be found by the equation       C   (  n  ,  k  )  =    C    k    n    =      n     C   k     =     (    n  k    )     =     n  !
{\displaystyle \mathbf {C} (n,k)=\mathbf {C} _{k}^{n}={_{n}C_{k}}={n \choose k}={\frac {n!}{k!(n-k)!}}}
But this is also the formula for a cell of Pascal's triangle.
Rather than performing the calculation, one can simply look up the appropriate entry in the triangle.
Provided the first row and the first entry in a row numbered 0, the answer will be located at entry     k    {\displaystyle k}   in row     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
For example, suppose 8 jobs need to be filled but there are 10 candidates; the selection committee wants to know how many ways there are of selecting 8 from the 10.
The answer is entry 8 in row 10, which is 45; that is, 10 choose 8 is 45.
Relation to binomial distribution and convolutions   When divided by      2   n      {\displaystyle 2^{n}}   , the     n    {\displaystyle n}   th row of Pascal's triangle becomes the binomial distribution in the symmetric case where     p  =    1  2      {\displaystyle p={\frac {1}{2}}}   .
By the central limit theorem , this distribution approaches the normal distribution as     n    {\displaystyle n}   increases.
This can also be seen by applying Stirling's formula to the factorials involved in the formula for combinations.
This is related to the operation of discrete convolution in two ways.
First, polynomial multiplication corresponds exactly to discrete convolution, so that repeatedly convolving the sequence     {  …  ,  0  ,  0  ,  1  ,  1  ,  0  ,  0  ,  …  }    {\displaystyle \{\ldots ,0,0,1,1,0,0,\ldots \}}   with itself corresponds to taking powers of     x  +  1    {\displaystyle x+1}   , and hence to generating the rows of the triangle.
Second, repeatedly convolving the distribution function for a random variable with itself corresponds to calculating the distribution function for a sum of n independent copies of that variable; this is exactly the situation to which the central limit theorem applies, and hence results in the normal distribution in the limit.
(The operation of repeatedly taking a convolution of something with itself is called the convolution power .)
Patterns and properties   Pascal's triangle has many properties and contains many patterns of numbers.
Each frame represents a row in Pascal's triangle.
Each column of pixels is a number in binary with the least significant bit at the bottom.
Light pixels represent ones and the dark pixels are zeroes.
The numbers of compositions of n +1 into k +1 ordered partitions form Pascal's triangle.
Rows   The sum of the elements of a single row is twice the sum of the row preceding it.
For example, row 0 (the topmost row) has a value of 1, row 1 has a value of 2, row 2 has a value of 4, and so forth.
This is because every item in a row produces two items in the next row: one left and one right.
The sum of the elements of row     n    {\displaystyle n}   equals to      2   n      {\displaystyle 2^{n}}   .
Taking the product of the elements in each row, the sequence of products (sequence A001142 in the OEIS ) is related to the base of the natural logarithm, e .
Specifically, define the sequence      s   n      {\displaystyle s_{n}}   for all     n  ≥  0    {\displaystyle n\geq 0}   as follows:      s   n    =   ∏   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )     =   ∏   k  =  0    n       n  !
{\displaystyle s_{n}=\prod _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}=\prod _{k=0}^{n}{\frac {n!}{k!(n-k)!}}}
Then, the ratio of successive row products is        s   n  +  1     s   n      =     (  n  +  1  )   !
n  +  2     ∏   k  =  0    n  +  1      1   k   !
2         n   !
n  +  1     ∏   k  =  0    n      1   k   !
2          =     (  n  +  1   )   n      n  !
{\displaystyle {\frac {s_{n+1}}{s_{n}}}={\frac {\displaystyle (n+1)!^{n+2}\prod _{k=0}^{n+1}{\frac {1}{k!^{2}}}}{\displaystyle n!^{n+1}\prod _{k=0}^{n}{\frac {1}{k!^{2}}}}}={\frac {(n+1)^{n}}{n!}}}
and the ratio of these ratios is         s   n  +  1    ⋅   s   n  −  1      s   n    2      =    (     n  +  1   n    )    n    ,    n  ≥  1.
{\displaystyle {\frac {s_{n+1}\cdot s_{n-1}}{s_{n}^{2}}}=\left({\frac {n+1}{n}}\right)^{n},~n\geq 1.}
The right-hand side of the above equation takes the form of the limit definition of     e    {\displaystyle e}        e  =   lim   n  →  ∞      (   1  +    1  n     )    n      {\displaystyle e=\lim _{n\to \infty }\left(1+{\frac {1}{n}}\right)^{n}}   .
π    {\displaystyle \pi }   can be found in Pascal's triangle by use of the Nilakantha infinite series.
π  =  3  +   ∑   n  =  1    ∞    (  −  1   )   n  +  1        (     2  n  +  1   1    )        (     2  n  +  1   2    )        (     2  n  +  2   2    )          {\displaystyle \pi =3+\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }(-1)^{n+1}{\frac {2n+1 \choose 1}{{2n+1 \choose 2}{2n+2 \choose 2}}}}    The     n    {\displaystyle n}   th row reads as the numeral      11   a    n      {\displaystyle 11_{a}^{n}}   for all     a    {\displaystyle a}   .
See Extension to arbitrary bases .
Some of the numbers in Pascal's triangle correlate to numbers in Lozanić's triangle .
The sum of the squares of the elements of row n equals the middle element of row 2 n .
For example, 1 2 + 4 2 + 6 2 + 4 2 + 1 2 = 70 .
In general form:      ∑   k  =  0    n        (    n  k    )      2    =     (     2  n   n    )     .
{\displaystyle \sum _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}^{2}={2n \choose n}.}
On any row n , where n is even, the middle term minus the term two spots to the left equals a Catalan number , specifically the ( n /2 + 1) th Catalan number.
For example: on row 4, 6 − 1 = 5 , which is the 3rd Catalan number, and 4/2 + 1 = 3 .
In a row p where p is a prime number , all the terms in that row except the 1s are multiples of p .
This can be proven easily, since if     p  ∈   P     {\displaystyle p\in \mathbb {P} }   , then p has no factors save for 1 and itself.
Every entry in the triangle is an integer, so therefore by definition     (  p  −  k  )  !
{\displaystyle (p-k)!}
and     k  !
{\displaystyle k!}
are factors of     p  !
{\displaystyle p!}
However, there is no possible way p itself can show up in the denominator, so therefore p (or some multiple of it) must be left in the numerator, making the entire entry a multiple of p .
Parity : To count odd terms in row n , convert n to binary .
Let x be the number of 1s in the binary representation.
Then the number of odd terms will be 2 x .
These numbers are the values in Gould's sequence .
Every entry in row 2 n − 1, n ≥ 0, is odd.
Polarity : When the elements of a row of Pascal's triangle are alternately added and subtracted together, the result is 0.
For example, row 6 is 1, 6, 15, 20, 15, 6, 1, so the formula is 1 − 6 + 15 − 20 + 15 − 6 + 1 = 0.
Diagonals   Derivation of simplex numbers from a left-justified Pascal's triangle  The diagonals of Pascal's triangle contain the figurate numbers of simplices:  The diagonals going along the left and right edges contain only 1's.
The diagonals next to the edge diagonals contain the natural numbers in order.
The 1-dimensional simplex numbers increment by 1 as the line segments extend to the next whole number along the number line.
Moving inwards, the next pair of diagonals contain the triangular numbers in order.
The next pair of diagonals contain the tetrahedral numbers in order, and the next pair give pentatope numbers .
P   0    (  n  )     =   P   d    (  0  )  =  1  ,       P   d    (  n  )     =   P   d    (  n  −  1  )  +   P   d  −  1    (  n  )        =   ∑   i  =  0    n     P   d  −  1    (  i  )  =   ∑   i  =  0    d     P   i    (  n  −  1  )  .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P_{0}(n)&=P_{d}(0)=1,\\P_{d}(n)&=P_{d}(n-1)+P_{d-1}(n)\\&=\sum _{i=0}^{n}P_{d-1}(i)=\sum _{i=0}^{d}P_{i}(n-1).\end{aligned}}}    The symmetry of the triangle implies that the n th d-dimensional number is equal to the d th  n -dimensional number.
An alternative formula that does not involve recursion is      P   d    (  n  )  =    1   d  !
∏   k  =  0    d  −  1    (  n  +  k  )  =     n   (  d  )     d  !
=     (     n  +  d  −  1   d    )     ,    {\displaystyle P_{d}(n)={\frac {1}{d!
}}\prod _{k=0}^{d-1}(n+k)={n^{(d)} \over d!
}={\binom {n+d-1}{d}},}   where n ( d ) is the rising factorial .
The geometric meaning of a function P d is: P d (1) = 1 for all d .
Construct a d - dimensional triangle (a 3-dimensional triangle is a tetrahedron ) by placing additional dots below an initial dot, corresponding to P d (1) = 1.
Place these dots in a manner analogous to the placement of numbers in Pascal's triangle.
To find P d ( x ), have a total of x dots composing the target shape.
P d ( x ) then equals the total number of dots in the shape.
A 0-dimensional triangle is a point and a 1-dimensional triangle is simply a line, and therefore P 0 ( x ) = 1 and P 1 ( x ) = x , which is the sequence of natural numbers.
The number of dots in each layer corresponds to P d − 1 ( x ).
Calculating a row or diagonal by itself   There are simple algorithms to compute all the elements in a row or diagonal without computing other elements or factorials.
To compute row     n    {\displaystyle n}   with the elements         (    n  0    )      ,      (    n  1    )      ,  …  ,      (    n  n    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{0}},{\tbinom {n}{1}},\ldots ,{\tbinom {n}{n}}}   , begin with         (    n  0    )      =  1    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{0}}=1}   .
For each subsequent element, the value is determined by multiplying the previous value by a fraction with slowly changing numerator and denominator:         (    n  k    )     =     (    n   k  −  1     )     ×     n  +  1  −  k   k    .
{\displaystyle {n \choose k}={n \choose k-1}\times {\frac {n+1-k}{k}}.}
For example, to calculate row 5, the fractions are        5  1       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{1}}}   ,        4  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {4}{2}}}   ,        3  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{3}}}   ,        2  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{4}}}   and        1  5       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{5}}}   , and hence the elements are         (    5  0    )      =  1    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {5}{0}}=1}   ,         (    5  1    )      =  1  ×     5  1     =  5    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {5}{1}}=1\times {\tfrac {5}{1}}=5}   ,         (    5  2    )      =  5  ×     4  2     =  10    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {5}{2}}=5\times {\tfrac {4}{2}}=10}   , etc.
(The remaining elements are most easily obtained by symmetry.)
To compute the diagonal containing the elements         (    n  0    )      ,      (     n  +  1   1    )      ,      (     n  +  2   2    )      ,  …  ,    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{0}},{\tbinom {n+1}{1}},{\tbinom {n+2}{2}},\ldots ,}   begin again with         (    n  0    )      =  1    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{0}}=1}   and obtain subsequent elements by multiplication by certain fractions:         (     n  +  k   k    )     =     (     n  +  k  −  1    k  −  1     )     ×     n  +  k   k    .
{\displaystyle {n+k \choose k}={n+k-1 \choose k-1}\times {\frac {n+k}{k}}.}
For example, to calculate the diagonal beginning at         (    5  0    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {5}{0}}}   , the fractions are        6  1     ,     7  2     ,     8  3     ,  …    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {6}{1}},{\tfrac {7}{2}},{\tfrac {8}{3}},\ldots }   , and the elements are         (    5  0    )      =  1  ,      (    6  1    )      =  1  ×     6  1     =  6  ,      (    7  2    )      =  6  ×     7  2     =  21    {\displaystyle {\tbinom {5}{0}}=1,{\tbinom {6}{1}}=1\times {\tfrac {6}{1}}=6,{\tbinom {7}{2}}=6\times {\tfrac {7}{2}}=21}   , etc.
By symmetry, these elements are equal to         (    5  5    )      ,      (    6  5    )      ,      (    7  5    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {5}{5}},{\tbinom {6}{5}},{\tbinom {7}{5}}}   , etc.
Fibonacci sequence in Pascal's triangle  Overall patterns and properties   A level-4 approximation to a Sierpinski triangle obtained by shading the first 32 rows of a Pascal triangle white if the binomial coefficient is even and black if it is odd.
The pattern obtained by coloring only the odd numbers in Pascal's triangle closely resembles the fractal known as the Sierpinski triangle .
This resemblance becomes increasingly accurate as more rows are considered; in the limit, as the number of rows approaches infinity, the resulting pattern is the Sierpinski triangle, assuming a fixed perimeter.
More generally, numbers could be colored differently according to whether or not they are multiples of 3, 4, etc.
; this results in other similar patterns.
As the proportion of black numbers tends to zero with increasing n , a corollary is that the proportion of odd binomial coefficients tends to zero as n tends to infinity.
10        10   20    Pascal's triangle overlaid on a grid gives the number of distinct paths to each square, assuming only rightward and downward movements are considered.
In a triangular portion of a grid (as in the images below), the number of shortest grid paths from a given node to the top node of the triangle is the corresponding entry in Pascal's triangle.
On a Plinko game board shaped like a triangle, this distribution should give the probabilities of winning the various prizes.
If the rows of Pascal's triangle are left-justified, the diagonal bands (colour-coded below) sum to the Fibonacci numbers .
1   1  1   1  2  1   1  3  3  1   1  4  6  4  1   1  5  10  10  5  1   1  6  15  20  15  6  1   1  7  21  35  35  21  7  1  Construction as matrix exponential            exp  ⁡    (     .
1    .
2    .
3    .
4    .
    )
=    (     1    .
1    1    .
1    2    1    .
1    3    3    1    .
1    4    6    4    1     )         e   counting       =   binomial         {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\exp {\begin{pmatrix}.&.&.&.&.\\1&.&.&.&.\\.&2&.&.&.\\.&.&3&.&.\\.&.&.&4&.\end{pmatrix}}&={\begin{pmatrix}1&.&.&.&.\\1&1&.&.&.\\1&2&1&.&.\\1&3&3&1&.\\1&4&6&4&1\end{pmatrix}}\\e^{\text{counting}}&={\text{binomial}}\end{aligned}}}   Binomial matrix as matrix exponential.
All the dots represent 0.
See also: Pascal matrix  Due to its simple construction by factorials, a very basic representation of Pascal's triangle in terms of the matrix exponential can be given: Pascal's triangle is the exponential of the matrix which has the sequence 1, 2, 3, 4, ...
on its subdiagonal and zero everywhere else.
Construction of Clifford algebra using simplices   Labelling the elements of each n-simplex matches the basis elements of Clifford algebra used as forms in Geometric Algebra rather than matrices.
Recognising the geometric operations, such as rotations, allows the algebra operations to be discovered.
Just as each row, n , starting at 0, of Pascal's triangle corresponds to an (n-1) -simplex, as described below, it also defines the number of named basis forms in n dimensional Geometric algebra .
The binomial theorem can be used to prove the geometric relationship provided by Pascal's triangle.
This same proof could be applied to simplices except that the first column of all 1's must be ignored whereas in the algebra these correspond to the real numbers,      R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   , with basis 1.
Relation to geometry of polytopes   This section does not cite any sources .
( October 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Pascal's triangle can be used as a lookup table for the number of elements (such as edges and corners) within a polytope (such as a triangle, a tetrahedron, a square, or a cube).
Number of elements of simplices   Let's begin by considering the 3rd line of Pascal's triangle, with values 1, 3, 3, 1.
A 2-dimensional triangle has one 2-dimensional element (itself), three 1-dimensional elements (lines, or edges), and three 0-dimensional elements ( vertices , or corners).
The meaning of the final number (1) is more difficult to explain (but see below).
Continuing with our example, a tetrahedron has one 3-dimensional element (itself), four 2-dimensional elements (faces), six 1-dimensional elements (edges), and four 0-dimensional elements (vertices).
Adding the final 1 again, these values correspond to the 4th row of the triangle (1, 4, 6, 4, 1).
Line 1 corresponds to a point, and Line 2 corresponds to a line segment (dyad).
This pattern continues to arbitrarily high-dimensioned hyper-tetrahedrons (known as simplices ).
To understand why this pattern exists, one must first understand that the process of building an n -simplex from an ( n − 1) -simplex consists of simply adding a new vertex to the latter, positioned such that this new vertex lies outside of the space of the original simplex, and connecting it to all original vertices.
As an example, consider the case of building a tetrahedron from a triangle, the latter of whose elements are enumerated by row 3 of Pascal's triangle: 1 face, 3 edges, and 3 vertices.
To build a tetrahedron from a triangle, position a new vertex above the plane of the triangle and connect this vertex to all three vertices of the original triangle.
The number of a given dimensional element in the tetrahedron is now the sum of two numbers: first the number of that element found in the original triangle, plus the number of new elements, each of which is built upon elements of one fewer dimension from the original triangle .
Thus, in the tetrahedron, the number of cells (polyhedral elements) is 0 + 1 = 1 ; the number of faces is 1 + 3 = 4 ; the number of edges is 3 + 3 = 6 ; the number of new vertices is 3 + 1 = 4 .
This process of summing the number of elements of a given dimension to those of one fewer dimension to arrive at the number of the former found in the next higher simplex is equivalent to the process of summing two adjacent numbers in a row of Pascal's triangle to yield the number below.
Thus, the meaning of the final number (1) in a row of Pascal's triangle becomes understood as representing the new vertex that is to be added to the simplex represented by that row to yield the next higher simplex represented by the next row.
This new vertex is joined to every element in the original simplex to yield a new element of one higher dimension in the new simplex, and this is the origin of the pattern found to be identical to that seen in Pascal's triangle.
Number of elements of hypercubes   A similar pattern is observed relating to squares , as opposed to triangles.
To find the pattern, one must construct an analog to Pascal's triangle, whose entries are the coefficients of ( x + 2) row number , instead of ( x + 1) row number .
There are a couple ways to do this.
The simpler is to begin with row 0 = 1 and row 1 = 1, 2.
Proceed to construct the analog triangles according to the following rule:         (    n  k    )     =  2  ×     (     n  −  1    k  −  1     )     +     (     n  −  1   k    )     .
{\displaystyle {n \choose k}=2\times {n-1 \choose k-1}+{n-1 \choose k}.}
That is, choose a pair of numbers according to the rules of Pascal's triangle, but double the one on the left before adding.
This results in:           1        1     2        1     4     4        1     6     12     8        1     8     24     32     16        1     10     40     80     80     32        1     12     60    160   240   192    64        1     14     84    280   560   672   448   128        {\displaystyle {\begin{matrix}{\text{  1}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{  2}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{  4}}\quad {\text{  4}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{  6}}\quad {\text{ 12}}\quad {\text{  8}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{  8}}\quad {\text{ 24}}\quad {\text{ 32}}\quad {\text{ 16}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{ 10}}\quad {\text{ 40}}\quad {\text{ 80}}\quad {\text{ 80}}\quad {\text{ 32}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{ 12}}\quad {\text{ 60}}\quad 160\quad 240\quad 192\quad {\text{ 64}}\\{\text{  1}}\quad {\text{ 14}}\quad {\text{ 84}}\quad 280\quad 560\quad 672\quad 448\quad 128\end{matrix}}}    The other way of producing this triangle is to start with Pascal's triangle and multiply each entry by 2 k , where k is the position in the row of the given number.
For example, the 2nd value in row 4 of Pascal's triangle is 6 (the slope of 1s corresponds to the zeroth entry in each row).
To get the value that resides in the corresponding position in the analog triangle, multiply 6 by 2 position number = 6 × 2 2 = 6 × 4 = 24 .
Now that the analog triangle has been constructed, the number of elements of any dimension that compose an arbitrarily dimensioned cube (called a hypercube ) can be read from the table in a way analogous to Pascal's triangle.
For example, the number of 2-dimensional elements in a 2-dimensional cube (a square) is one, the number of 1-dimensional elements (sides, or lines) is 4, and the number of 0-dimensional elements (points, or vertices) is 4.
This matches the 2nd row of the table (1, 4, 4).
A cube has 1 cube, 6 faces, 12 edges, and 8 vertices, which corresponds to the next line of the analog triangle (1, 6, 12, 8).
This pattern continues indefinitely.
To understand why this pattern exists, first recognize that the construction of an n -cube from an ( n − 1) -cube is done by simply duplicating the original figure and displacing it some distance (for a regular n -cube, the edge length) orthogonal to the space of the original figure, then connecting each vertex of the new figure to its corresponding vertex of the original.
This initial duplication process is the reason why, to enumerate the dimensional elements of an n -cube, one must double the first of a pair of numbers in a row of this analog of Pascal's triangle before summing to yield the number below.
The initial doubling thus yields the number of "original" elements to be found in the next higher n -cube and, as before, new elements are built upon those of one fewer dimension (edges upon vertices, faces upon edges, etc.).
Again, the last number of a row represents the number of new vertices to be added to generate the next higher n -cube.
In this triangle, the sum of the elements of row m is equal to 3 m .
Again, to use the elements of row 4 as an example: 1 + 8 + 24 + 32 + 16 = 81 , which is equal to      3   4    =  81    {\displaystyle 3^{4}=81}   .
Counting vertices in a cube by distance   Each row of Pascal's triangle gives the number of vertices at each distance from a fixed vertex in an n -dimensional cube.
For example, in three dimensions, the third row (1 3 3 1) corresponds to the usual three-dimensional cube : fixing a vertex V , there is one vertex at distance 0 from V (that is, V itself), three vertices at distance 1, three vertices at distance √ 2 and one vertex at distance √ 3 (the vertex opposite V ).
The second row corresponds to a square, while larger-numbered rows correspond to hypercubes in each dimension.
Fourier transform of sin( x ) n +1 / x   As stated previously, the coefficients of ( x + 1) n are the nth row of the triangle.
Now the coefficients of ( x − 1) n are the same, except that the sign alternates from +1 to −1 and back again.
After suitable normalization, the same pattern of numbers occurs in the Fourier transform of sin( x ) n +1 / x .
More precisely: if n is even, take the real part of the transform, and if n is odd, take the imaginary part .
Then the result is a step function , whose values (suitably normalized) are given by the n th row of the triangle with alternating signs.
For example, the values of the step function that results from:        R  e     (    Fourier        )     {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {Re}}\left({\text{Fourier}}\left\right)}    compose the 4th row of the triangle, with alternating signs.
This is a generalization of the following basic result (often used in electrical engineering ):        R  e     (    Fourier        )     {\displaystyle {\mathfrak {Re}}\left({\text{Fourier}}\left\right)}    is the boxcar function .
The corresponding row of the triangle is row 0, which consists of just the number 1.
If n is congruent to 2 or to 3 mod 4, then the signs start with −1.
In fact, the sequence of the (normalized) first terms corresponds to the powers of i , which cycle around the intersection of the axes with the unit circle in the complex plane:     +  i  ,  −  1  ,  −  i  ,  +  1  ,  +  i  ,  …    {\displaystyle +i,-1,-i,+1,+i,\ldots }     Extensions   Pascal's triangle may be extended upwards, above the 1 at the apex, preserving the additive property, but there is more than one way to do so.
To higher dimensions   Pascal's triangle has higher dimensional generalizations.
The three-dimensional version is known as Pascal's pyramid or Pascal's tetrahedron , while the general versions are known as Pascal's simplices .
To complex numbers   When the factorial function is defined as     z  !
=  Γ  (  z  +  1  )    {\displaystyle z!=\Gamma (z+1)}   , Pascal's triangle can be extended beyond the integers to      C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }   , since     Γ  (  z  +  1  )    {\displaystyle \Gamma (z+1)}   is meromorphic to the entire complex plane .
To arbitrary bases   Isaac Newton once observed that the first five rows of Pascal's Triangle, considered as strings , are the corresponding powers of eleven.
He claimed
without proof that subsequent rows also generate powers of eleven.
In 1964, Dr. Robert L.
Morton presented the more generalized argument that each row      n    {\displaystyle n}   can be read as a radix     a    {\displaystyle a}   numeral, where      lim   n  →  ∞     11   a    n      {\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }11_{a}^{n}}   is the hypothetical terminal row, or limit , of the triangle, and the rows are its partial products.
He proved the entries of row     n    {\displaystyle n}   , when interpreted directly as a place-value numeral, correspond to the binomial expansion of     (  a  +  1   )   n    =   11   a    n      {\displaystyle (a+1)^{n}=11_{a}^{n}}   .
More rigorous proofs have since been developed.
To better understand the principle behind this interpretation, here are some things to recall about binomials:  A radix     a    {\displaystyle a}   numeral in positional notation (e.g.
14641   a      {\displaystyle 14641_{a}}   ) is a univariate polynomial in the variable     a    {\displaystyle a}   , where the degree of the variable of the     i    {\displaystyle i}   th term (starting with     i  =  0    {\displaystyle i=0}   ) is     i    {\displaystyle i}   .
For example,      14641   a    =  1  ⋅   a   4    +  4  ⋅   a   3    +  6  ⋅   a   2    +  4  ⋅   a   1    +  1  ⋅   a   0      {\displaystyle 14641_{a}=1\cdot a^{4}+4\cdot a^{3}+6\cdot a^{2}+4\cdot a^{1}+1\cdot a^{0}}   .
A row corresponds to the binomial expansion of     (  a  +  b   )   n      {\displaystyle (a+b)^{n}}   .
The variable     b    {\displaystyle b}   can be eliminated from the expansion by setting     b  =  1    {\displaystyle b=1}   .
The expansion now typifies the expanded form of a radix     a    {\displaystyle a}   numeral,   as demonstrated above .
Thus, when the entries of the row are concatenated and read in radix     a    {\displaystyle a}   they form the numerical equivalent of     (  a  +  1   )   n    =   11   a    n      {\displaystyle (a+1)^{n}=11_{a}^{n}}   .
If     c  =  a  +  1    {\displaystyle c=a+1}   for     c  <  0    {\displaystyle c<0}   , then the theorem holds for     a  =  {  c  −  1  ,  −  (  c  +  1  )  }    m  o  d    2  c    {\displaystyle a=\{c-1,-(c+1)\}\;\mathrm {mod} \;2c}   with odd values of     n    {\displaystyle n}    yielding negative row products.
By setting the row's radix (the variable     a    {\displaystyle a}   ) equal to one and ten, row     n    {\displaystyle n}   becomes the product      11   1    n    =   2   n      {\displaystyle 11_{1}^{n}=2^{n}}   and      11   10    n    =   11   n      {\displaystyle 11_{10}^{n}=11^{n}}   , respectively.
To illustrate, consider     a  =  n    {\displaystyle a=n}   , which yields the row product      n   n      (   1  +    1  n     )    n    =   11   n    n      {\displaystyle n^{n}\left(1+{\frac {1}{n}}\right)^{n}=11_{n}^{n}}   .
The numeric representation of      11   n    n      {\displaystyle 11_{n}^{n}}   is formed by concatenating the entries of row     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
In the image above, the twelfth row denotes the product:       11   12    12    =  1  :  10  :  56  :  164  :  353  :  560  :  650  :  560  :  353  :  164  :  56  :  10  :   1   12    =  27433  a   9699701   12      {\displaystyle 11_{12}^{12}=1:10:56:164:353:560:650:560:353:164:56:10:1_{12}=27433a9699701_{12}}    with compound digits (delimited by ":") in radix     12    {\displaystyle 12}   .
The digits from     k  =  n  −  1    {\displaystyle k=n-1}   through     k  =  1    {\displaystyle k=1}   are compound because these row entries compute to values greater than or equal to     12    {\displaystyle 12}   .
To normalize  the numeral, simply carry the first compound entry's prefix, that is, remove the prefix of the coefficient        (    n   n  −  1     )       {\displaystyle {n \choose n-1}}   from its leftmost digit up to, but excluding, its rightmost digit, and use radix-     12    {\displaystyle 12}   arithmetic to sum the removed prefix with the entry on its immediate left, then repeat this process, proceeding leftward, until the leftmost entry is reached.
In this particular example, the normalized string ends with     01    {\displaystyle 01}   for all     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
The leftmost digit is     2    {\displaystyle 2}   for     n  >  2    {\displaystyle n>2}   , which is obtained by carrying the     1    {\displaystyle 1}   of      10   n      {\displaystyle 10_{n}}   at entry     k  =  1    {\displaystyle k=1}   .
It follows that the length of the normalized value of      11   n    n      {\displaystyle 11_{n}^{n}}   is equal to the row length,     n  +  1    {\displaystyle n+1}   .
The integral part of      1.1   n    n      {\displaystyle 1.1_{n}^{n}}   contains exactly one digit because     n    {\displaystyle n}   (the number of places to the left the decimal has moved) is one less than the row length.
Below is the normalized value of      1.1   1234    1234      {\displaystyle 1.1_{1234}^{1234}}   .
Compound digits remain in the value because they are radix     1234    {\displaystyle 1234}    residues represented in radix ten:       1.1   1234    1234    =  2.885  :  2  :  35  :  977  :  696  :     …  ⏞     1227 digits    :  0  :   1   1234    =  2.717181235   …   10      {\displaystyle 1.1_{1234}^{1234}=2.885:2:35:977:696:\overbrace {\ldots } ^{\text{1227 digits}}:0:1_{1234}=2.717181235\ldots _{10}}   Particular way of storing and organizing data in a computer  For other uses, see Data structure (disambiguation) .
Not to be confused with Data type or Data model .
For information on Wikipedia's data structure, see Wikipedia:Administration § Data structure and development .
A data structure known as a hash table .
In computer science , a data structure is a data organization, and storage format that is usually chosen for efficient  access to data.
More precisely, a data structure is a collection of data values, the relationships among them, and the functions or operations that can be applied to the data,  i.e., it is an algebraic structure about data .
Usage   Data structures serve as the basis for abstract data types (ADT).
The ADT defines the logical form of the data type.
The data structure implements the physical form of the data type .
Different types of data structures are suited to different kinds of applications, and some are highly specialized to specific tasks.
For example, relational databases commonly use B-tree indexes for data retrieval,  while compiler  implementations usually use hash tables to look up identifiers .
Data structures provide a means to manage large amounts of data efficiently for uses such as large databases and internet indexing services.
Usually, efficient data structures are key to designing efficient algorithms .
Some formal design methods and programming languages emphasize data structures, rather than algorithms, as the key organizing factor in software design.
Data structures can be used to organize the storage and retrieval of information stored in both main memory and secondary memory .
Implementation   Data structures can be implemented using a variety of programming languages and techniques, but they all share the common goal of efficiently organizing and storing data.
Data structures are generally based on the ability of a computer to fetch and store data at any place in its memory, specified by a pointer —a bit  string , representing a memory address , that can be itself stored in memory and manipulated by the program.
Thus, the array and record data structures are based on computing the addresses of data items with arithmetic operations , while the linked data structures are based on storing addresses of data items within the structure itself.
This approach to data structuring has profound implications for the efficiency and scalability of algorithms.
For instance, the contiguous memory allocation in arrays facilitates rapid access and modification operations, leading to optimized performance in sequential data processing scenarios.
The implementation of a data structure usually requires writing a set of procedures that create and manipulate instances of that structure.
The efficiency of a data structure cannot be analyzed separately from those operations.
This observation motivates the theoretical concept of an abstract data type , a data structure that is defined indirectly by the operations that may be performed on it, and the mathematical properties of those operations (including their space and time cost).
Examples   Main article: List of data structures  The standard type hierarchy of the programming language Python 3 .
There are numerous types of data structures, generally built upon simpler primitive data types .
Well known examples are:    An array is a number of elements in a specific order, typically all of the same type (depending on the language, individual elements may either all be forced to be the same type, or may be of almost any type).
Elements are accessed using an integer index to specify which element is required.
Typical implementations allocate contiguous memory words for the elements of arrays (but this is not always a necessity).
Arrays may be fixed-length or resizable.
A linked list (also just called list ) is a linear collection of data elements of any type, called nodes, where each node has itself a value, and points to the next node in the linked list.
The principal advantage of a linked list over an array is that values can always be efficiently inserted and removed without relocating the rest of the list.
Certain other operations, such as random access to a certain element, are however slower on lists than on arrays.
A record (also called tuple or struct ) is an aggregate data structure.
A record is a value that contains other values, typically in fixed number and sequence and typically indexed by names.
The elements of records are usually called fields or members .
In the context of object-oriented programming , records are known as plain old data structures to distinguish them from objects.
Hash tables , also known as hash maps, are data structures that provide fast retrieval of values based on keys.
They use a hashing function to map keys to indexes in an array, allowing for constant-time access in the average case.
Hash tables are commonly used in dictionaries, caches, and database indexing.
However, hash collisions can occur, which can impact their performance.
Techniques like chaining and open addressing are employed to handle collisions.
Graphs are collections of nodes connected by edges, representing relationships between entities.
Graphs can be used to model social networks, computer networks, and transportation networks, among other things.
They consist of vertices (nodes) and edges (connections between nodes).
Graphs can be directed or undirected, and they can have cycles or be acyclic.
Graph traversal algorithms include breadth-first search and depth-first search.
Stacks and queues are abstract data types that can be implemented using arrays or linked lists.
A stack has two primary operations: push (adds an element to the top of the stack) and pop (removes the topmost element from the stack), that follow the Last In, First Out (LIFO) principle.
Queues have two main operations: enqueue (adds an element to the rear of the queue) and dequeue (removes an element from the front of the queue) that follow the First In, First Out (FIFO) principle.
Trees represent a hierarchical organization of elements.
A tree consists of nodes connected by edges, with one node being the root and all other nodes forming subtrees.
Trees are widely used in various algorithms and data storage scenarios.
Binary trees (particularly heaps ), AVL trees , and B-trees are some popular types of trees.
They enable efficient and optimal searching, sorting, and hierarchical representation of data.
A trie , also known as a prefix tree, is a specialized tree data structure used for the efficient retrieval of strings.
Tries store characters of a string as nodes, with each edge representing a character.
They are particularly useful in text processing scenarios like autocomplete, spell-checking, and dictionary implementations.
Tries enable fast searching and prefix-based operations on strings.
Language support   Most assembly languages and some low-level languages , such as BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language), lack built-in support for data structures.
On the other hand, many high-level programming languages and some higher-level assembly languages, such as MASM , have special syntax or other built-in support for certain data structures, such as records and arrays.
For example, the C (a direct descendant of BCPL) and Pascal languages support structs and records, respectively, in addition to vectors (one-dimensional arrays ) and multi-dimensional arrays.
Most programming languages feature some sort of library mechanism that allows data structure implementations to be reused by different programs.
Modern languages usually come with standard libraries that implement the most common data structures.
Examples are the C++  Standard Template Library , the Java Collections Framework , and the Microsoft  .NET Framework .
Modern languages also generally support modular programming , the separation between the interface of a library module and its implementation.
Some provide opaque data types that allow clients to hide implementation details.
Object-oriented programming languages , such as C++ , Java , and Smalltalk , typically use classes for this purpose.
Many known data structures have concurrent versions which allow multiple computing threads to access a single concrete instance of a data structure simultaneously.
Branch of mathematics that studies sets  This article is about the branch of mathematics.
For other uses, see Set theory (disambiguation) .
Not to be confused with Set theory (music) .
Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  A Venn diagram illustrating the intersection of two sets  Set theory is the branch of mathematical logic that studies sets , which can be informally described as collections of objects.
Although objects of any kind can be collected into a set, set theory — as a branch of mathematics — is mostly concerned with those that are relevant to mathematics as a whole.
The modern study of set theory was initiated by the German mathematicians Richard Dedekind and Georg Cantor in the 1870s.
In particular, Georg Cantor is commonly considered the founder of set theory.
The non-formalized systems investigated during this early stage go under the name of naive set theory .
After the discovery of paradoxes within naive set theory (such as Russell's paradox , Cantor's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox ), various axiomatic systems were proposed in the early twentieth century, of which Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (with or without the axiom of choice ) is still the best-known and most studied.
Set theory is commonly employed as a foundational system for the whole of mathematics, particularly in the form of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice.
Besides its foundational role, set theory also provides the framework to develop a mathematical theory of infinity , and has various applications in computer science (such as in the theory of relational algebra ), philosophy , formal semantics , and evolutionary dynamics .
Its foundational appeal, together with its paradoxes , its implications for the concept of infinity and its multiple applications, have made set theory an area of major interest for logicians and philosophers of mathematics .
Contemporary research into set theory covers a vast array of topics, ranging from the structure of the real number line to the study of the consistency of large cardinals .
History   Georg Cantor  Mathematical topics typically emerge and evolve through interactions among many researchers.
Set theory, however, was founded by a single paper in 1874 by Georg Cantor : " On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers ".
Since the 5th century BC, beginning with Greek mathematician Zeno of Elea in the West and early Indian mathematicians in the East, mathematicians had struggled with the concept of infinity .
Especially notable is the work of Bernard Bolzano in the first half of the 19th century.
Modern understanding of infinity began in 1870–1874, and was motivated by Cantor's work in real analysis .
Basic concepts and notation   Main articles: Set (mathematics) and Algebra of sets  Set theory begins with a fundamental binary relation between an object o and a set A .
If o is a member (or element ) of A , the notation o ∈ A is used.
A set is described by listing elements separated by commas, or by a characterizing property of its elements, within braces { }.
Since sets are objects, the membership relation can relate sets as well.
A derived binary relation between two sets is the subset relation, also called set inclusion .
If all the members of set A are also members of set B , then A is a subset of B , denoted A ⊆ B .
For example, {1, 2} is a subset of {1, 2, 3} , and so is {2} but {1, 4} is not.
As implied by this definition, a set is a subset of itself.
For cases where this possibility is unsuitable or would make sense to be rejected, the term proper subset is defined.
A is called a proper subset of B if and only if A is a subset of B , but A is not equal to B .
Also, 1, 2, and 3 are members (elements) of the set {1, 2, 3} , but are not subsets of it; and in turn, the subsets, such as {1} , are not members of the set {1, 2, 3} .
Just as arithmetic features binary operations on numbers , set theory features binary operations on sets.
The following is a partial list of them:  Union of the sets A and B , denoted A ∪ B , is the set of all objects that are a member of A , or B , or both.
For example, the union of {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is the set {1, 2, 3, 4} .
Intersection of the sets A and B , denoted A ∩ B , is the set of all objects that are members of both A and B .
For example, the intersection of {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is the set {2, 3} .
Set difference of U and A , denoted U \ A , is the set of all members of U that are not members of A .
The set difference {1, 2, 3} \ {2, 3, 4} is {1} , while conversely, the set difference {2, 3, 4} \ {1, 2, 3} is {4} .
When A is a subset of U , the set difference U \ A is also called the complement of A in U .
In this case, if the choice of U is clear from the context, the notation A c is sometimes used instead of U \ A , particularly if U is a universal set as in the study of Venn diagrams .
Symmetric difference of sets A and B , denoted A △ B or A ⊖ B , is the set of all objects that are a member of exactly one of A and B (elements which are in one of the sets, but not in both).
For instance, for the sets {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} , the symmetric difference set is {1, 4} .
It is the set difference of the union and the intersection, ( A ∪ B ) \ ( A ∩ B ) or ( A \ B ) ∪ ( B \ A ) .
Cartesian product of A and B , denoted A × B , is the set whose members are all possible ordered pairs  ( a , b ) , where a is a member of A and b is a member of B .
For example, the Cartesian product of {1, 2} and {red, white} is {(1, red), (1, white), (2, red), (2, white)}.
Power set of a set A , denoted       P    (  A  )    {\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}(A)}   , is the set whose members are all of the possible subsets of A .
For example, the power set of {1, 2} is { {}, {1}, {2}, {1, 2} } .
Some basic sets of central importance are the set of natural numbers , the set of real numbers and the empty set —the unique set containing no elements.
The empty set is also occasionally called the null set ,  though this name is ambiguous and can lead to several interpretations.
Ontology   Main article: von Neumann universe  An initial segment of the von Neumann hierarchy  A set is pure if all of its members are sets, all members of its members are sets, and so on.
For example, the set containing only the empty set is a nonempty pure set.
In modern set theory, it is common to restrict attention to the von Neumann universe of pure sets, and many systems of axiomatic set theory are designed to axiomatize the pure sets only.
There are many technical advantages to this restriction, and little generality is lost, because essentially all mathematical concepts can be modeled by pure sets.
Sets in the von Neumann universe are organized into a cumulative hierarchy , based on how deeply their members, members of members, etc.
are nested.
Each set in this hierarchy is assigned (by transfinite recursion ) an ordinal number      α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   , known as its rank.
The rank of a pure set     X    {\displaystyle X}   is defined to be the least ordinal that is strictly greater than the rank of any of its elements.
For example, the empty set is assigned rank 0, while the set {{}} containing only the empty set is assigned rank 1.
For each ordinal     α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   , the set      V   α      {\displaystyle V_{\alpha }}   is defined to consist of all pure sets with rank less than     α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   .
The entire von Neumann universe is denoted     V    {\displaystyle V}   .
Formalized set theory   Elementary set theory can be studied informally and intuitively, and so can be taught in primary schools using Venn diagrams .
The intuitive approach tacitly assumes that a set may be formed from the class of all objects satisfying any particular defining condition.
This assumption gives rise to paradoxes, the simplest and best known of which are Russell's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox .
Axiomatic set theory was originally devised to rid set theory of such paradoxes.
The most widely studied systems of axiomatic set theory imply that all sets form a cumulative hierarchy .
Such systems come in two flavors, those whose ontology consists of:  Sets alone .
This includes the most common axiomatic set theory, Z ermelo– F raenkel set theory with the axiom of c hoice (ZFC).
Fragments of ZFC include: Zermelo set theory , which replaces the axiom schema of replacement with that of separation ;  General set theory , a small fragment of Zermelo set theory sufficient for the Peano axioms and finite sets ;  Kripke–Platek set theory , which omits the axioms of infinity, powerset , and choice , and weakens the axiom schemata of separation and replacement .
Sets and proper classes .
These include Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory , which has the same strength as ZFC for theorems about sets alone, and Morse–Kelley set theory and Tarski–Grothendieck set theory , both of which are stronger than ZFC.
The above systems can be modified to allow urelements , objects that can be members of sets but that are not themselves sets and do not have any members.
The New Foundations systems of NFU (allowing urelements ) and NF (lacking them), associate with Willard Van Orman Quine , are not based on a cumulative hierarchy.
NF and NFU include a "set of everything", relative to which every set has a complement.
In these systems urelements matter, because NF, but not NFU, produces sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold.
Despite NF's ontology not reflecting the traditional cumulative hierarchy and violating well-foundedness, Thomas Forster has argued that it does reflect an iterative conception of set .
Systems of constructive set theory , such as CST, CZF, and IZF, embed their set axioms in intuitionistic instead of classical logic .
Yet other systems accept classical logic but feature a nonstandard membership relation.
These include rough set theory and fuzzy set theory , in which the value of an atomic formula embodying the membership relation is not simply True or False .
The Boolean-valued models of ZFC are a related subject.
An enrichment of ZFC called internal set theory was proposed by Edward Nelson in 1977.
Applications   Many mathematical concepts can be defined precisely using only set theoretic concepts.
For example, mathematical structures as diverse as graphs , manifolds , rings , vector spaces , and relational algebras can all be defined as sets satisfying various (axiomatic) properties.
Equivalence and order relations are ubiquitous in mathematics, and the theory of mathematical relations can be described in set theory.
Set theory is also a promising foundational system for much of mathematics.
Since the publication of the first volume of Principia Mathematica , it has been claimed that most (or even all) mathematical theorems can be derived using an aptly designed set of axioms for set theory, augmented with many definitions, using first or second-order logic .
For example, properties of the natural and real numbers can be derived within set theory, as each number system can be identified with a set of equivalence classes under a suitable equivalence relation whose field is some infinite set .
Set theory as a foundation for mathematical analysis , topology , abstract algebra , and discrete mathematics is likewise uncontroversial; mathematicians accept (in principle) that theorems in these areas can be derived from the relevant definitions and the axioms of set theory.
However, it remains that few full derivations of complex mathematical theorems from set theory have been formally verified, since such formal derivations are often much longer than the natural language proofs mathematicians commonly present.
One verification project, Metamath , includes human-written, computer-verified derivations of more than 12,000 theorems starting from ZFC set theory, first-order logic and propositional logic .
ZFC and the Axiom of Choice have recently seen applications in evolutionary dynamics ,  enhancing the understanding of well-established models of evolution and interaction.
Areas of study   Set theory is a major area of research in mathematics, with many interrelated subfields.
Combinatorial set theory   Main article: Infinitary combinatorics  Combinatorial set theory concerns extensions of finite combinatorics to infinite sets.
This includes the study of cardinal arithmetic and the study of extensions of Ramsey's theorem such as the Erdős–Rado theorem .
Descriptive set theory   Main article: Descriptive set theory  Descriptive set theory is the study of subsets of the real line and, more generally, subsets of Polish spaces .
It begins with the study of pointclasses in the Borel hierarchy and extends to the study of more complex hierarchies such as the projective hierarchy and the Wadge hierarchy .
Many properties of Borel sets can be established in ZFC, but proving these properties hold for more complicated sets requires additional axioms related to determinacy and large cardinals.
The field of effective descriptive set theory is between set theory and recursion theory .
It includes the study of lightface pointclasses , and is closely related to hyperarithmetical theory .
In many cases, results of classical descriptive set theory have effective versions; in some cases, new results are obtained by proving the effective version first and then extending ("relativizing") it to make it more broadly applicable.
A recent area of research concerns Borel equivalence relations and more complicated definable equivalence relations .
This has important applications to the study of invariants in many fields of mathematics.
Fuzzy set theory   Main article: Fuzzy set theory  In set theory as Cantor defined and Zermelo and Fraenkel axiomatized, an object is either a member of a set or not.
In fuzzy set theory this condition was relaxed by Lotfi A.
Zadeh so an object has a degree of membership in a set, a number between 0 and 1.
For example, the degree of membership of a person in the set of "tall people" is more flexible than a simple yes or no answer and can be a real number such as 0.75.
Inner model theory   Main article: Inner model theory  An inner model of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF) is a transitive class that includes all the ordinals and satisfies all the axioms of ZF.
The canonical example is the constructible universe  L developed by Gödel.
One reason that the study of inner models is of interest is that it can be used to prove consistency results.
For example, it can be shown that regardless of whether a model V of ZF satisfies the continuum hypothesis or the axiom of choice , the inner model L constructed inside the original model will satisfy both the generalized continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice.
Thus the assumption that ZF is consistent (has at least one model) implies that ZF together with these two principles is consistent.
The study of inner models is common in the study of determinacy and large cardinals , especially when considering axioms such as the axiom of determinacy that contradict the axiom of choice.
Even if a fixed model of set theory satisfies the axiom of choice, it is possible for an inner model to fail to satisfy the axiom of choice.
For example, the existence of sufficiently large cardinals implies that there is an inner model satisfying the axiom of determinacy (and thus not satisfying the axiom of choice).
Large cardinals   Main article: Large cardinal property  A large cardinal is a cardinal number with an extra property.
Many such properties are studied, including inaccessible cardinals , measurable cardinals , and many more.
These properties typically imply the cardinal number must be very large, with the existence of a cardinal with the specified property unprovable in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory .
Determinacy   Main article: Determinacy  Determinacy refers to the fact that, under appropriate assumptions, certain two-player games of perfect information are determined from the start in the sense that one player must have a winning strategy.
The existence of these strategies has important consequences in descriptive set theory, as the assumption that a broader class of games is determined often implies that a broader class of sets will have a topological property.
The axiom of determinacy (AD) is an important object of study; although incompatible with the axiom of choice, AD implies that all subsets of the real line are well behaved (in particular, measurable and with the perfect set property).
AD can be used to prove that the Wadge degrees have an elegant structure.
Forcing   Main article: Forcing (mathematics)  Paul Cohen invented the method of forcing while searching for a model of ZFC in which the continuum hypothesis fails, or a model of ZF in which the axiom of choice fails.
Forcing adjoins to some given model of set theory additional sets in order to create a larger model with properties determined (i.e.
"forced") by the construction and the original model.
For example, Cohen's construction adjoins additional subsets of the natural numbers without changing any of the cardinal numbers of the original model.
Forcing is also one of two methods for proving relative consistency by finitistic methods, the other method being Boolean-valued models .
Cardinal invariants   Main article: Cardinal characteristics of the continuum  A cardinal invariant is a property of the real line measured by a cardinal number.
For example, a well-studied invariant is the smallest cardinality of a collection of meagre sets of reals whose union is the entire real line.
These are invariants in the sense that any two isomorphic models of set theory must give the same cardinal for each invariant.
Many cardinal invariants have been studied, and the relationships between them are often complex and related to axioms of set theory.
Set-theoretic topology   Main article: Set-theoretic topology  Set-theoretic topology studies questions of general topology that are set-theoretic in nature or that require advanced methods of set theory for their solution.
Many of these theorems are independent of ZFC, requiring stronger axioms for their proof.
A famous problem is the normal Moore space question , a question in general topology that was the subject of intense research.
The answer to the normal Moore space question was eventually proved to be independent of ZFC.
Objections to set theory   From set theory's inception, some mathematicians have objected to it as a foundation for mathematics : see Controversy over Cantor's theory .
The most common objection to set theory, one Kronecker voiced in set theory's earliest years, starts from the constructivist view that mathematics is loosely related to computation.
If this view is granted, then the treatment of infinite sets, both in naive and in axiomatic set theory, introduces into mathematics methods and objects that are not computable even in principle.
The feasibility of constructivism as a substitute foundation for mathematics was greatly increased by Errett Bishop 's influential book Foundations of Constructive Analysis .
A different objection put forth by Henri Poincaré is that defining sets using the axiom schemas of specification and replacement , as well as the axiom of power set , introduces impredicativity , a type of circularity , into the definitions of mathematical objects.
The scope of predicatively founded mathematics, while less than that of the commonly accepted Zermelo–Fraenkel theory, is much greater than that of constructive mathematics, to the point that Solomon Feferman has said that "all of scientifically applicable analysis can be developed ".
Ludwig Wittgenstein condemned set theory philosophically for its connotations of mathematical platonism .
He wrote that "set theory is wrong", since it builds on the "nonsense" of fictitious symbolism, has "pernicious idioms", and that it is nonsensical to talk about "all numbers".
Wittgenstein identified mathematics with algorithmic human deduction;  the need for a secure foundation for mathematics seemed, to him, nonsensical.
Moreover, since human effort is necessarily finite, Wittgenstein's philosophy required an ontological commitment to radical constructivism and finitism .
Meta-mathematical statements — which, for Wittgenstein, included any statement quantifying over infinite domains, and thus almost all modern set theory — are not mathematics.
Few modern philosophers have adopted Wittgenstein's views after a spectacular blunder in Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics : Wittgenstein attempted to refute Gödel's incompleteness theorems after having only read the abstract.
As reviewers Kreisel , Bernays , Dummett , and Goodstein all pointed out, many of his critiques did not apply to the paper in full.
Only recently have philosophers such as Crispin Wright begun to rehabilitate Wittgenstein's arguments.
Category theorists have proposed topos theory as an alternative to traditional axiomatic set theory.
Topos theory can interpret various alternatives to that theory, such as constructivism , finite set theory, and computable set theory.
Topoi also give a natural setting for forcing and discussions of the independence of choice from ZF, as well as providing the framework for pointless topology and Stone spaces .
An active area of research is the univalent foundations and related to it homotopy type theory .
Within homotopy type theory, a set may be regarded as a homotopy 0-type, with universal properties of sets arising from the inductive and recursive properties of higher inductive types .
Principles such as the axiom of choice and the law of the excluded middle can be formulated in a manner corresponding to the classical formulation in set theory or perhaps in a spectrum of distinct ways unique to type theory.
Some of these principles may be proven to be a consequence of other principles.
The variety of formulations of these axiomatic principles allows for a detailed analysis of the formulations required in order to derive various mathematical results.
Set theory in mathematical education   As set theory gained popularity as a foundation for modern mathematics, there has been support for the idea of introducing the basics of naive set theory early in mathematics education .
In the US in the 1960s, the New Math experiment aimed to teach basic set theory, among other abstract concepts, to primary school students, but was met with much criticism.
The math syllabus in European schools followed this trend, and currently includes the subject at different levels in all grades.
Venn diagrams are widely employed to explain basic set-theoretic relationships to primary school students (even though John Venn originally devised them as part of a procedure to assess the validity of inferences in term logic ).
Set theory is used to introduce students to logical operators (NOT, AND, OR), and semantic or rule description (technically intensional definition  ) of sets (e.g.
"months starting with the letter A "), which may be useful when learning computer programming , since Boolean logic is used in various programming languages .
Likewise, sets and other collection-like objects, such as multisets and lists , are common datatypes in computer science and programming .
In addition to that, sets are commonly referred to in mathematical teaching when talking about different types of numbers (the sets      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   of natural numbers ,      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   of integers ,      R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   of real numbers , etc.
), and when defining a mathematical function as a relation from one set (the domain ) to another set (the range ).
Two geometries based on axioms closely related to those specifying Euclidean geometry  Behavior of lines with a common perpendicular in each of the three types of geometry  Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane  Outline History ( Timeline )  Branches  Euclidean  Non-Euclidean  Elliptic  Spherical  Hyperbolic  Non-Archimedean geometry  Projective  Affine  Synthetic  Analytic  Algebraic  Arithmetic  Diophantine  Differential  Riemannian  Symplectic  Discrete differential  Complex  Finite  Discrete/Combinatorial  Digital  Convex  Computational  Fractal  Incidence  Noncommutative geometry  Noncommutative algebraic geometry   Concepts Features Dimension  Straightedge and compass constructions  Angle  Curve  Diagonal  Orthogonality ( Perpendicular )  Parallel  Vertex  Congruence  Similarity  Symmetry   Zero-dimensional  Point   One-dimensional  Line  segment  ray  Length   Two-dimensional  Plane  Area  Polygon   Triangle  Altitude  Hypotenuse  Pythagorean theorem   Parallelogram  Square  Rectangle  Rhombus  Rhomboid   Quadrilateral  Trapezoid  Kite   Circle  Diameter  Circumference  Area    Three-dimensional  Volume  Cube  cuboid  Cylinder  Dodecahedron  Icosahedron  Octahedron  Pyramid  Platonic Solid  Sphere  Tetrahedron   Four - / other-dimensional  Tesseract  Hypersphere   Geometers  by name  Aida  Aryabhata  Ahmes  Alhazen  Apollonius  Archimedes  Atiyah  Baudhayana  Bolyai  Brahmagupta  Cartan  Coxeter  Descartes  Euclid  Euler  Gauss  Gromov  Hilbert  Huygens  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Kātyāyana  Khayyám  Klein  Lobachevsky  Manava  Minkowski  Minggatu  Pascal  Pythagoras  Parameshvara  Poincaré  Riemann  Sakabe  Sijzi  al-Tusi  Veblen  Virasena  Yang Hui  al-Yasamin  Zhang  List of geometers   by period  BCE  Ahmes  Baudhayana  Manava  Pythagoras  Euclid  Archimedes  Apollonius  1–1400s  Zhang  Kātyāyana  Aryabhata  Brahmagupta  Virasena  Alhazen  Sijzi  Khayyám  al-Yasamin  al-Tusi  Yang Hui  Parameshvara  1400s–1700s  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Descartes  Pascal  Huygens  Minggatu  Euler  Sakabe  Aida  1700s–1900s  Gauss  Lobachevsky  Bolyai  Riemann  Klein  Poincaré  Hilbert  Minkowski  Cartan  Veblen  Coxeter  Present day  Atiyah  Gromov   v t e  In mathematics , non-Euclidean geometry consists of two geometries based on axioms closely related to those that specify Euclidean geometry .
Principles   The essential difference between the metric geometries is the nature of parallel lines.
Euclid 's fifth postulate, the parallel postulate , is equivalent to Playfair's postulate , which states that, within a two-dimensional plane, for any given line l and a point A , which is not on l , there is exactly one line through A that does not intersect l .
In hyperbolic geometry, by contrast, there are infinitely many lines through A not intersecting l , while in elliptic geometry, any line through A intersects l .
Another way to describe the differences between these geometries is to consider two straight lines indefinitely extended in a two-dimensional plane that are both perpendicular to a third line (in the same plane):  In Euclidean geometry, the lines remain at a constant distance from each other (meaning that a line drawn perpendicular to one line at any point will intersect the other line and the length of the line segment joining the points of intersection remains constant) and are known as parallels.
In hyperbolic geometry, they "curve away" from each other, increasing in distance as one moves further from the points of intersection with the common perpendicular; these lines are often called ultraparallels .
In elliptic geometry, the lines "curve toward" each other and intersect.
History   See also: Euclidean geometry § History , History of geometry , and Hyperbolic geometry § History  Background   Euclidean geometry , named after the Greek mathematician  Euclid , includes some of the oldest known mathematics, and geometries that deviated from this were not widely accepted as legitimate until the 19th century.
The debate that eventually led to the discovery of the non-Euclidean geometries began almost as soon as Euclid wrote Elements .
In the Elements , Euclid begins with a limited number of assumptions (23 definitions, five common notions, and five postulates) and seeks to prove all the other results ( propositions ) in the work.
The most notorious of the postulates is often referred to as "Euclid's Fifth Postulate", or simply the parallel postulate , which in Euclid's original formulation is:  If a straight line falls on two straight lines in such a manner that the interior angles on the same side are together less than two right angles, then the straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that side on which are the angles less than the two right angles.
Other mathematicians have devised simpler forms of this property.
Regardless of the form of the postulate, however, it consistently appears more complicated than Euclid's other postulates :   1.
To draw a straight line from any point to any point.
To produce  a finite straight line continuously in a straight line.
To describe a circle with any centre and distance .
That all right angles are equal to one another.
For at least a thousand years, geometers were troubled by the disparate complexity of the fifth postulate, and believed it could be proved as a theorem from the other four.
Many attempted to find a proof by contradiction , including Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen, 11th century),   Omar Khayyám (12th century), Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī (13th century), and Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri (18th century).
The theorems of Ibn al-Haytham, Khayyam and al-Tusi on quadrilaterals , including the Lambert quadrilateral and Saccheri quadrilateral , were "the first few theorems of the hyperbolic and the elliptic geometries ".
These theorems along with their alternative postulates, such as Playfair's axiom , played an important role in the later development of non-Euclidean geometry.
These early attempts at challenging the fifth postulate had a considerable influence on its development among later European geometers, including Witelo , Levi ben Gerson , Alfonso , John Wallis and Saccheri.
All of these early attempts made at trying to formulate non-Euclidean geometry, however, provided flawed proofs of the parallel postulate, depending on assumptions that are now recognized as essentially equivalent to the parallel postulate.
These early attempts did, however, provide some early properties of the hyperbolic and elliptic geometries.
Khayyam, for example, tried to derive it from an equivalent postulate he formulated from "the principles of the Philosopher" ( Aristotle ): "Two convergent straight lines intersect and it is impossible for two convergent straight lines to diverge in the direction in which they converge."
Khayyam then considered the three cases right, obtuse, and acute that the summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral can take and after proving a number of theorems about them, he correctly refuted the obtuse and acute cases based on his postulate and hence derived the classic postulate of Euclid, which he didn't realize was equivalent to his own postulate.
Another example is al-Tusi's son, Sadr al-Din (sometimes known as "Pseudo-Tusi"), who wrote a book on the subject in 1298, based on al-Tusi's later thoughts, which presented another hypothesis equivalent to the parallel postulate.
"He essentially revised both the Euclidean system of axioms and postulates and the proofs of many propositions from the Elements ."
His work was published in Rome in 1594 and was studied by European geometers, including Saccheri  who criticised this work as well as that of Wallis.
Giordano Vitale , in his book Euclide restituo (1680, 1686), used the Saccheri quadrilateral to prove that if three points are equidistant on the base AB and the summit CD, then AB and CD are everywhere equidistant.
In a work titled Euclides ab Omni Naevo Vindicatus ( Euclid Freed from All Flaws ), published in 1733, Saccheri quickly discarded elliptic geometry as a possibility (some others of Euclid's axioms must be modified for elliptic geometry to work) and set to work proving a great number of results in hyperbolic geometry.
He finally reached a point where he believed that his results demonstrated the impossibility of hyperbolic geometry.
His claim seems to have been based on Euclidean presuppositions, because no logical contradiction was present.
In this attempt to prove Euclidean geometry he instead unintentionally discovered a new viable geometry, but did not realize it.
In 1766 Johann Lambert wrote, but did not publish, Theorie der Parallellinien in which he attempted, as Saccheri did, to prove the fifth postulate.
He worked with a figure now known as a Lambert quadrilateral , a quadrilateral with three right angles (can be considered half of a Saccheri quadrilateral).
He quickly eliminated the possibility that the fourth angle is obtuse, as had Saccheri and Khayyam, and then proceeded to prove many theorems under the assumption of an acute angle.
Unlike Saccheri, he never felt that he had reached a contradiction with this assumption.
He had proved the non-Euclidean result that the sum of the angles in a triangle increases as the area of the triangle decreases, and this led him to speculate on the possibility of a model of the acute case on a sphere of imaginary radius.
He did not carry this idea any further.
At this time it was widely believed that the universe worked according to the principles of Euclidean geometry.
Discovery of non-Euclidean geometry   The beginning of the 19th century would finally witness decisive steps in the creation of non-Euclidean geometry.
Circa 1813, Carl Friedrich Gauss and independently around 1818, the German professor of law Ferdinand Karl Schweikart  had the germinal ideas of non-Euclidean geometry worked out, but neither published any results.
Schweikart's nephew Franz Taurinus did publish important results of hyperbolic trigonometry in two papers in 1825 and 1826, yet while admitting the internal consistency of hyperbolic geometry, he still believed in the special role of Euclidean geometry.
Then, in 1829–1830 the Russian mathematician Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky and in 1832 the Hungarian mathematician János Bolyai separately and independently published treatises on hyperbolic geometry.
Consequently, hyperbolic geometry is called Lobachevskian or Bolyai-Lobachevskian geometry, as both mathematicians, independent of each other, are the basic authors of non-Euclidean geometry.
Gauss mentioned to Bolyai's father, when shown the younger Bolyai's work, that he had developed such a geometry several years before,  though he did not publish.
While Lobachevsky created a non-Euclidean geometry by negating the parallel postulate, Bolyai worked out a geometry where both the Euclidean and the hyperbolic geometry are possible depending on a parameter k .
Bolyai ends his work by mentioning that it is not possible to decide through mathematical reasoning alone if the geometry of the physical universe is Euclidean or non-Euclidean; this is a task for the physical sciences.
Bernhard Riemann , in a famous lecture in 1854, founded the field of Riemannian geometry , discussing in particular the ideas now called manifolds , Riemannian metric , and curvature .
He constructed an infinite family of non-Euclidean geometries by giving a formula for a family of Riemannian metrics on the unit ball in Euclidean space .
The simplest of these is called elliptic geometry and it is considered a non-Euclidean geometry due to its lack of parallel lines.
By formulating the geometry in terms of a curvature tensor , Riemann allowed non-Euclidean geometry to apply to higher dimensions.
Beltrami (1868) was the first to apply Riemann's geometry to spaces of negative curvature.
Terminology   It was Gauss who coined the term "non-Euclidean geometry".
He was referring to his own work, which today we call hyperbolic geometry or Lobachevskian geometry .
Several modern authors still use the generic term non-Euclidean geometry to mean hyperbolic geometry .
Arthur Cayley noted that distance between points inside a conic could be defined in terms of logarithm and the projective cross-ratio function.
The method has become called the Cayley–Klein metric because Felix Klein exploited it to describe the non-Euclidean geometries in articles  in 1871 and 1873 and later in book form.
The Cayley–Klein metrics provided working models of hyperbolic and elliptic metric geometries, as well as Euclidean geometry.
Klein is responsible for the terms "hyperbolic" and "elliptic" (in his system he called Euclidean geometry parabolic , a term that generally fell out of use  ).
His influence has led to the current usage of the term "non-Euclidean geometry" to mean either "hyperbolic" or "elliptic" geometry.
There are some mathematicians who would extend the list of geometries that should be called "non-Euclidean" in various ways.
There are many kinds of geometry that are quite different from Euclidean geometry but are also not necessarily included in the conventional meaning of "non-Euclidean geometry", such as more general instances of Riemannian geometry .
Axiomatic basis of non-Euclidean geometry   Euclidean geometry can be axiomatically described in several ways.
However, Euclid's original system of five postulates (axioms) is not one of these, as his proofs relied on several unstated assumptions that should also have been taken as axioms.
Hilbert's system consisting of 20 axioms  most closely follows the approach of Euclid and provides the justification for all of Euclid's proofs.
Other systems, using different sets of undefined terms obtain the same geometry by different paths.
All approaches, however, have an axiom that is logically equivalent to Euclid's fifth postulate, the parallel postulate.
Hilbert uses the Playfair axiom form, while Birkhoff , for instance, uses the axiom that says that, "There exists a pair of similar but not congruent triangles."
In any of these systems, removal of the one axiom equivalent to the parallel postulate, in whatever form it takes, and leaving all the other axioms intact, produces absolute geometry .
As the first 28 propositions of Euclid (in The Elements ) do not require the use of the parallel postulate or anything equivalent to it, they are all true statements in absolute geometry.
To obtain a non-Euclidean geometry, the parallel postulate (or its equivalent) must be replaced by its negation .
Negating the Playfair's axiom form, since it is a compound statement (...
there exists one and only one ...), can be done in two ways:  Either there will exist more than one line through the point parallel to the given line or there will exist no lines through the point parallel to the given line.
In the first case, replacing the parallel postulate (or its equivalent) with the statement "In a plane, given a point P and a line l not passing through P, there exist two lines through P, which do not meet l " and keeping all the other axioms, yields hyperbolic geometry .
The second case is not dealt with as easily.
Simply replacing the parallel postulate with the statement, "In a plane, given a point P and a line l not passing through P, all the lines through P meet l ", does not give a consistent set of axioms.
This follows since parallel lines exist in absolute geometry,  but this statement says that there are no parallel lines.
This problem was known (in a different guise) to Khayyam, Saccheri and Lambert and was the basis for their rejecting what was known as the "obtuse angle case".
To obtain a consistent set of axioms that includes this axiom about having no parallel lines, some other axioms must be tweaked.
These adjustments depend upon the axiom system used.
Among others, these tweaks have the effect of modifying Euclid's second postulate from the statement that line segments can be extended indefinitely to the statement that lines are unbounded.
Riemann 's elliptic geometry emerges as the most natural geometry satisfying this axiom.
Models   Comparison of elliptic, Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries in two dimensions  On a sphere, the sum of the angles of a triangle is not equal to 180°.
The surface of a sphere is not a Euclidean space, but locally the laws of the Euclidean geometry are good approximations.
In a small triangle on the face of the earth, the sum of the angles is very nearly 180°.
Models of non-Euclidean geometry are mathematical models of geometries which are non-Euclidean in the sense that it is not the case that exactly one line can be drawn parallel to a given line l through a point that is not on l .
In hyperbolic geometric models, by contrast, there are infinitely many lines through A parallel to l , and in elliptic geometric models, parallel lines do not exist.
(See the entries on hyperbolic geometry and elliptic geometry for more information.)
Euclidean geometry is modelled by our notion of a "flat plane ."
The simplest model for elliptic geometry is a sphere, where lines are " great circles " (such as the equator or the meridians on a globe ), and points opposite each other are identified (considered to be the same).
The pseudosphere has the appropriate curvature to model hyperbolic geometry.
Elliptic geometry   Main article: Elliptic geometry  The simplest model for elliptic geometry is a sphere, where lines are " great circles " (such as the equator or the meridians on a globe ), and points opposite each other (called antipodal points ) are identified (considered the same).
This is also one of the standard models of the real projective plane .
The difference is that as a model of elliptic geometry a metric is introduced permitting the measurement of lengths and angles, while as a model of the projective plane there is no such metric.
In the elliptic model, for any given line l and a point A , which is not on l , all lines through A will intersect l .
Hyperbolic geometry   Main article: Hyperbolic geometry  Even after the work of Lobachevsky, Gauss, and Bolyai, the question remained: "Does such a model exist for hyperbolic geometry ?
The model for hyperbolic geometry was answered by Eugenio Beltrami , in 1868, who first showed that a surface called the pseudosphere has the appropriate curvature to model a portion of hyperbolic space and in a second paper in the same year, defined the Klein model , which models the entirety of hyperbolic space, and used this to show that Euclidean geometry and hyperbolic geometry were equiconsistent so that hyperbolic geometry was logically consistent if and only if Euclidean geometry was.
(The reverse implication follows from the horosphere model of Euclidean geometry.)
In the hyperbolic model, within a two-dimensional plane, for any given line l and a point A , which is not on l , there are infinitely many lines through A that do not intersect l .
In these models, the concepts of non-Euclidean geometries are represented by Euclidean objects in a Euclidean setting.
This introduces a perceptual distortion wherein the straight lines of the non-Euclidean geometry are represented by Euclidean curves that visually bend.
This "bending" is not a property of the non-Euclidean lines, only an artifice of the way they are represented.
Three-dimensional non-Euclidean geometry   Main article: Thurston geometry  In three dimensions, there are eight models of geometries.
There are Euclidean, elliptic, and hyperbolic geometries, as in the two-dimensional case; mixed geometries that are partially Euclidean and partially hyperbolic or spherical; twisted versions of the mixed geometries; and one unusual geometry that is completely anisotropic (i.e.
every direction behaves differently).
Uncommon properties   Lambert quadrilateral in hyperbolic geometry  Saccheri quadrilaterals in the three geometries  Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries naturally have many similar properties, namely those that do not depend upon the nature of parallelism.
This commonality is the subject of absolute geometry (also called neutral geometry ).
However, the properties that distinguish one geometry from others have historically received the most attention.
Besides the behavior of lines with respect to a common perpendicular, mentioned in the introduction, we also have the following:  A Lambert quadrilateral is a quadrilateral with three right angles.
The fourth angle of a Lambert quadrilateral is acute if the geometry is hyperbolic, a right angle if the geometry is Euclidean or obtuse if the geometry is elliptic.
Consequently, rectangles exist (a statement equivalent to the parallel postulate) only in Euclidean geometry.
A Saccheri quadrilateral is a quadrilateral with two sides of equal length, both perpendicular to a side called the base .
The other two angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are called the summit angles and they have equal measure.
The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are acute if the geometry is hyperbolic, right angles if the geometry is Euclidean and obtuse angles if the geometry is elliptic.
The sum of the measures of the angles of any triangle is less than 180° if the geometry is hyperbolic, equal to 180° if the geometry is Euclidean, and greater than 180° if the geometry is elliptic.
The defect of a triangle is the numerical value (180° − sum of the measures of the angles of the triangle).
This result may also be stated as: the defect of triangles in hyperbolic geometry is positive, the defect of triangles in Euclidean geometry is zero, and the defect of triangles in elliptic geometry is negative.
Importance   Before the models of a non-Euclidean plane were presented by Beltrami, Klein, and Poincaré, Euclidean geometry stood unchallenged as the mathematical model of space .
Furthermore, since the substance of the subject in synthetic geometry was a chief exhibit of rationality, the Euclidean point of view represented absolute authority.
The discovery of the non-Euclidean geometries had a ripple effect which went far beyond the boundaries of mathematics and science.
The philosopher Immanuel Kant 's treatment of human knowledge had a special role for geometry.
It was his prime example of synthetic a priori knowledge; not derived from the senses nor deduced through logic — our knowledge of space was a truth that we were born with.
Unfortunately for Kant, his concept of this unalterably true geometry was Euclidean.
Theology was also affected by the change from absolute truth to relative truth in the way that mathematics is related to the world around it, that was a result of this paradigm shift.
Non-Euclidean geometry is an example of a scientific revolution in the history of science , in which mathematicians and scientists changed the way they viewed their subjects.
Some geometers called Lobachevsky the " Copernicus of Geometry" due to the revolutionary character of his work.
The existence of non-Euclidean geometries impacted the intellectual life of Victorian England in many ways  and in particular was one of the leading factors that caused a re-examination of the teaching of geometry based on Euclid's Elements .
This curriculum issue was hotly debated at the time and was even the subject of a book, Euclid and his Modern Rivals , written by Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (1832–1898) better known as Lewis Carroll , the author of Alice in Wonderland .
Planar algebras   In analytic geometry a plane is described with Cartesian coordinates : C = { ( x,y ) : x , y ∈ ℝ }.
The points are sometimes identified with complex numbers  z = x + y ε where ε 2 ∈ { –1, 0, 1}.
The Euclidean plane corresponds to the case ε 2 = −1 since the modulus of z is given by      z   z   ∗    =  (  x  +  y  ϵ  )  (  x  −  y  ϵ  )  =   x   2    +   y   2      {\displaystyle zz^{\ast }=(x+y\epsilon )(x-y\epsilon )=x^{2}+y^{2}}    and this quantity is the square of the Euclidean distance between z and the origin.
For instance, { z | z z * = 1} is the unit circle .
For planar algebra, non-Euclidean geometry arises in the other cases.
When ε 2 = +1 , then z is a split-complex number and conventionally j replaces epsilon.
Then      z   z   ∗    =  (  x  +  y   j   )  (  x  −  y   j   )  =   x   2    −   y   2       {\displaystyle zz^{\ast }=(x+y\mathbf {j} )(x-y\mathbf {j} )=x^{2}-y^{2}\!}
and { z | z z * = 1} is the unit hyperbola .
When ε 2 = 0 , then z is a dual number .
This approach to non-Euclidean geometry explains the non-Euclidean angles: the parameters of slope in the dual number plane and hyperbolic angle in the split-complex plane correspond to angle in Euclidean geometry.
Indeed, they each arise in polar decomposition of a complex number z .
Kinematic geometries   Hyperbolic geometry found an application in kinematics with the physical cosmology introduced by Hermann Minkowski in 1908.
Minkowski introduced terms like worldline and proper time into mathematical physics .
He realized that the submanifold , of events one moment of proper time into the future, could be considered a hyperbolic space of three dimensions.
Already in the 1890s Alexander Macfarlane was charting this submanifold through his Algebra of Physics and hyperbolic quaternions , though Macfarlane did not use cosmological language as Minkowski did in 1908.
The relevant structure is now called the hyperboloid model of hyperbolic geometry.
The non-Euclidean planar algebras support kinematic geometries in the plane.
For instance, the split-complex number  z = e a j can represent a spacetime event one moment into the future of a frame of reference of rapidity  a .
Furthermore, multiplication by z amounts to a Lorentz boost mapping the frame with rapidity zero to that with rapidity a .
Kinematic study makes use of the dual numbers      z  =  x  +  y  ϵ  ,    ϵ   2    =  0  ,    {\displaystyle z=x+y\epsilon ,\quad \epsilon ^{2}=0,}   to represent the classical description of motion in absolute time and space :
The equations      x   ′    =  x  +  v  t  ,    t   ′    =  t    {\displaystyle x^{\prime }=x+vt,\quad t^{\prime }=t}   are equivalent to a shear mapping in linear algebra:        (      x  ′        t  ′      )    =    (     1    v      0    1     )      (     x      t     )    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{pmatrix}x'\\t'\end{pmatrix}}={\begin{pmatrix}1&v\\0&1\end{pmatrix}}{\begin{pmatrix}x\\t\end{pmatrix}}.}
With dual numbers the mapping is      t   ′    +   x   ′    ϵ  =  (  1  +  v  ϵ  )  (  t  +  x  ϵ  )  =  t  +  (  x  +  v  t  )  ϵ  .
{\displaystyle t^{\prime }+x^{\prime }\epsilon =(1+v\epsilon )(t+x\epsilon )=t+(x+vt)\epsilon .}
Another view of special relativity as a non-Euclidean geometry was advanced by E.
B.
Wilson and Gilbert Lewis in Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1912.
They revamped the analytic geometry implicit in the split-complex number algebra into synthetic geometry of premises and deductions.
Fiction   Non-Euclidean geometry often makes appearances in works of science fiction and fantasy .
In 1895, H.
G.
Wells published the short story "The Remarkable Case of Davidson's Eyes".
To appreciate this story one should know how antipodal points on a sphere are identified in a model of the elliptic plane.
In the story, in the midst of a thunderstorm, Sidney Davidson sees "Waves and a remarkably neat schooner" while working in an electrical laboratory at Harlow Technical College.
At the story's close, Davidson proves to have witnessed H.M.S.
Fulmar off Antipodes Island .
Non-Euclidean geometry is sometimes connected with the influence of the 20th-century horror fiction writer H.
P.
Lovecraft .
In his works, many unnatural things follow their own unique laws of geometry: in Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos , the sunken city of R'lyeh is characterized by its non-Euclidean geometry.
It is heavily implied this is achieved as a side effect of not following the natural laws of this universe rather than simply using an alternate geometric model, as the sheer innate wrongness of it is said to be capable of driving those who look upon it insane.
The main character in Robert Pirsig 's Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance mentioned Riemannian geometry on multiple occasions.
In The Brothers Karamazov , Dostoevsky discusses non-Euclidean geometry through his character Ivan.
Christopher Priest's novel Inverted World describes the struggle of living on a planet with the form of a rotating pseudosphere .
Robert Heinlein's The Number of the Beast utilizes non-Euclidean geometry to explain instantaneous transport through space and time and between parallel and fictional universes.
Zeno Rogue's HyperRogue is a roguelike game set on the hyperbolic plane , allowing the player to experience many properties of this geometry.
Many mechanics, quests, and locations are strongly dependent on the features of hyperbolic geometry.
In the Renegade Legion  science fiction setting for FASA 's wargame , role-playing-game and fiction, faster-than-light travel and communications is possible through the use of Hsieh Ho's Polydimensional Non-Euclidean Geometry, published sometime in the middle of the 22nd century.
In Ian Stewart's  Flatterland the protagonist Victoria Line visits all kinds of non-Euclidean worlds.
Page notice  You are not logged in.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Attempt to persuade or to determine the truth of a conclusion  This article is about the subject as it is studied in logic and philosophy.
For other uses, see Argument (disambiguation) .
An argument is a series of sentences, statements, or propositions some of which are called premises and one is the conclusion.
The purpose of an argument is to give reasons for one's conclusion via justification, explanation, and/or persuasion.
Arguments are intended to determine or show the degree of truth or acceptability of another statement called a conclusion.
The process of crafting or delivering arguments, argumentation , can be studied from three main perspectives: the logical , the dialectical and the rhetorical perspective.
In logic , an argument is usually expressed not in natural language but in a symbolic formal language , and it can be defined as any group of propositions of which one is claimed to follow from the others through deductively  valid  inferences that preserve truth from the premises to the conclusion.
This logical perspective on argument is relevant for scientific fields such as mathematics and computer science .
Logic is the study of the forms of reasoning in arguments and the development of standards and criteria to evaluate arguments.
Deductive arguments can be valid , and the valid ones can be sound : in a valid argument, premisses necessitate the conclusion, even if one or more of the premises is false and the conclusion is false; in a sound argument, true premises necessitate a true conclusion.
Inductive arguments , by contrast, can have different degrees of logical strength: the stronger or more cogent the argument, the greater the probability that the conclusion is true, the weaker the argument, the lesser that probability.
The standards for evaluating non-deductive arguments may rest on different or additional criteria than truth—for example, the persuasiveness of so-called "indispensability claims" in transcendental arguments ,  the quality of hypotheses in retroduction , or even the disclosure of new possibilities for thinking and acting.
In dialectics , and also in a more colloquial sense, an argument can be conceived as a social and verbal means of trying to resolve, or at least contend with, a conflict or difference of opinion that has arisen or exists between two or more parties.
For the rhetorical perspective, the argument is constitutively linked with the context, in particular with the time and place in which the argument is located.
From this perspective, the argument is evaluated not just by two parties (as in a dialectical approach) but also by an audience.
In both dialectic and rhetoric, arguments are used not through formal but through natural language.
Since classical antiquity, philosophers and rhetoricians have developed lists of argument types in which premises and conclusions are connected in informal and defeasible ways.
Etymology   The Latin root arguere (to make bright, enlighten, make known, prove, etc.)
is from Proto-Indo-European  argu-yo- , suffixed form of arg- (to shine; white).
Formal and informal   Further information: Informal logic and Formal logic  Informal arguments as studied in informal logic , are presented in ordinary language and are intended for everyday discourse .
Formal arguments are studied in formal logic (historically called symbolic logic , more commonly referred to as mathematical logic today) and are expressed in a formal language .
Informal logic emphasizes the study of argumentation ; formal logic emphasizes implication and inference .
Informal arguments are sometimes implicit.
The rational structure—the relationship of claims, premises, warrants, relations of implication, and conclusion—is not always spelled out and immediately visible and must be made explicit by analysis.
Standard logical account of argument types   Argument terminology  There are several kinds of arguments in logic, the best known of which are "deductive" and "inductive."
An argument has one or more premises but only one conclusion.
Each premise and the conclusion are truth bearers or "truth-candidates", each capable of being either true or false (but not both).
These truth values bear on the terminology used with arguments.
Deductive arguments   Main article: Deductive argument  A deductive argument asserts that the truth of the conclusion is a logical consequence of the premises: if the premises are true, the conclusion must be true.
It would be self-contradictory to assert the premises and deny the conclusion because the negation of the conclusion is contradictory to the truth of the premises.
Based on the premises, the conclusion follows necessarily (with certainty).
Given premises that A=B and B=C, then the conclusion follows necessarily that A=C.
Deductive arguments are sometimes referred to as "truth-preserving" arguments.
For example, consider the argument that because bats can fly (premise=true), and all flying creatures are birds (premise=false), therefore bats are birds (conclusion=false).
If we assume the premises are true, the conclusion follows necessarily, and it is a valid argument.
Validity   Main article: Validity (logic)  In terms of validity, deductive arguments may be either valid or invalid.
An argument is valid, if and only if (iff) it is impossible in all possible worlds for the premises to be true and the conclusion false; validity is about what is possible; it is concerned with how the premises and conclusion relate and what is possible.
An argument is formally valid if and only if the denial of the conclusion is incompatible with accepting all the premises.
In formal logic, the validity of an argument depends not on the actual truth or falsity of its premises and conclusion, but on whether the argument has a valid logical form .
The validity of an argument is not a guarantee of the truth of its conclusion.
A valid argument may have false premises that render it inconclusive: the conclusion of a valid argument with one or more false premises may be true or false.
Logic seeks to discover the forms that make arguments valid.
A form of argument is valid if and only if the conclusion is true under all interpretations of that argument in which the premises are true.
Since the validity of an argument depends on its form, an argument can be shown invalid by showing that its form is invalid.
This can be done by a counter example of the same form of argument with premises that are true under a given interpretation, but a conclusion that is false under that interpretation.
In informal logic this is called a counter argument .
The form of an argument can be shown by the use of symbols.
For each argument form, there is a corresponding statement form, called a corresponding conditional , and an argument form is valid if and only if its corresponding conditional is a logical truth .
A statement form which is logically true is also said to be a valid statement form.
A statement form is a logical truth if it is true under all interpretations .
A statement form can be shown to be a logical truth by either (a) showing that it is a tautology or (b) by means of a proof procedure .
The corresponding conditional of a valid argument is a necessary truth (true in all possible worlds ) and so the conclusion necessarily follows from the premises, or follows of logical necessity.
The conclusion of a valid argument is not necessarily true, it depends on whether the premises are true.
If the conclusion, itself, is a necessary truth, it is without regard to the premises.
Some examples:  All Greeks are human and all humans are mortal; therefore, all Greeks are mortal.
: Valid argument; if the premises are true the conclusion must be true.
Some Greeks are logicians and some logicians are tiresome; therefore, some Greeks are tiresome.
Invalid argument: the tiresome logicians might all be Romans (for example).
Either we are all doomed or we are all saved; we are not all saved; therefore, we are all doomed.
Valid argument; the premises entail the conclusion.
(This does not mean the conclusion has to be true; it is only true if the premises are true, which they may not be!)
Some men are hawkers.
Some hawkers are rich.
Therefore, some men are rich.
Invalid argument.
This can be easier seen by giving a counter-example with the same argument form: Some people are herbivores.
Some herbivores are zebras.
Therefore, some people are zebras.
Invalid argument, as it is possible that the premises be true and the conclusion false.
In the above second to last case (Some men are hawkers ...), the counter-example follows the same logical form as the previous argument, (Premise 1: "Some X are Y ."
Premise 2: "Some Y are Z ."
Conclusion: "Some X are Z .")
in order to demonstrate that whatever hawkers may be, they may or may not be rich, in consideration of the premises as such.
(See also: Existential import ).
The forms of argument that render deductions valid are well-established, however some invalid arguments can also be persuasive depending on their construction ( inductive arguments , for example).
(See also: Formal fallacy and Informal fallacy ).
Soundness   Main article: Soundness  An argument is sound when the argument is valid and argument's premise(s) is/are true, therefore the conclusion is true.
Inductive arguments   Main article: Inductive reasoning  An inductive argument asserts that the truth of the conclusion is supported by the probability of the premises.
For example, given that the military budget of the United States is the largest in the world (premise=true), then it is probable that it will remain so for the next 10 years (conclusion=true).
Arguments that involve predictions are inductive since the future is uncertain.
An inductive argument is said to be strong or weak.
If the premises of an inductive argument are assumed true, is it probable the conclusion is also true?
If yes, the argument is strong.
If no, it is weak.
A strong argument is said to be cogent if it has all true premises.
Otherwise, the argument is uncogent.
The military budget argument example is a strong, cogent argument.
Non-deductive logic is reasoning using arguments in which the premises support the conclusion but do not entail it.
Forms of non-deductive logic include the statistical syllogism , which argues from generalizations true for the most part, and induction , a form of reasoning that makes generalizations based on individual instances.
An inductive argument is said to be cogent if and only if the truth of the argument's premises would render the truth of the conclusion probable (i.e., the argument is strong ), and the argument's premises are, in fact, true.
Cogency can be considered inductive logic 's analogue to deductive logic 's " soundness ".
Despite its name, mathematical induction is not a form of inductive reasoning.
The lack of deductive validity is known as the problem of induction .
Defeasible arguments and argumentation schemes   Main article: Argumentation scheme  In modern argumentation theories, arguments are regarded as defeasible passages from premises to a conclusion.
Defeasibility means that when additional information (new evidence or contrary arguments) is provided, the premises may be no longer lead to the conclusion ( non-monotonic reasoning ).
This type of reasoning is referred to as defeasible reasoning .
For instance we consider the famous Tweety example:  Tweety is a bird.
Birds generally fly.
Therefore, Tweety (probably) flies.
This argument is reasonable and the premises support the conclusion unless additional information indicating that the case is an exception comes in.
If Tweety is a penguin, the inference is no longer justified by the premise.
Defeasible arguments are based on generalizations that hold only in the majority of cases, but are subject to exceptions and defaults.
In order to represent and assess defeasible reasoning, it is necessary to combine the logical rules (governing the acceptance of a conclusion based on the acceptance of its premises) with rules of material inference, governing how a premise can support a given conclusion (whether it is reasonable or not to draw a specific conclusion from a specific description of a state of affairs).
Argumentation schemes have been developed to describe and assess the acceptability or the fallaciousness of defeasible arguments.
Argumentation schemes are stereotypical patterns of inference, combining semantic-ontological relations with types of reasoning and logical axioms and representing the abstract structure of the most common types of natural arguments.
A typical example is the argument from expert opinion, shown below, which has two premises and a conclusion.
Argument from expert opinion  Major Premise:  Source E is an expert in subject domain S containing proposition A.
Minor Premise:  E asserts that proposition A is true (false).
Conclusion:  A is true (false).
Each scheme may be associated with a set of critical questions, namely criteria for assessing dialectically the reasonableness and acceptability of an argument.
The matching critical questions are the standard ways of casting the argument into doubt.
By analogy   Argument by analogy may be thought of as argument from the particular to particular.
An argument by analogy may use a particular truth in a premise to argue towards a similar particular truth in the conclusion.
For example, if A.
Plato was mortal, and B.
Socrates was like Plato in other respects, then asserting that C.
Socrates was mortal is an example of argument by analogy because the reasoning employed in it proceeds from a particular truth in a premise (Plato was mortal) to a similar particular truth in the conclusion, namely that Socrates was mortal.
Other kinds   Other kinds of arguments may have different or additional standards of validity or justification.
For example, philosopher Charles Taylor said that so-called transcendental arguments are made up of a "chain of indispensability claims" that attempt to show why something is necessarily true based on its connection to our experience,  while Nikolas Kompridis has suggested that there are two types of " fallible " arguments: one based on truth claims, and the other based on the time-responsive disclosure of possibility ( world disclosure ).
Kompridis said that the French philosopher Michel Foucault was a prominent advocate of this latter form of philosophical argument.
World-disclosing   Main article: World disclosure  World-disclosing arguments are a group of philosophical arguments that according to Nikolas Kompridis employ a disclosive approach, to reveal features of a wider ontological or cultural-linguistic understanding—a "world", in a specifically ontological sense—in order to clarify or transform the background of meaning ( tacit knowledge ) and what Kompridis has called the "logical space" on which an argument implicitly depends.
Explanations   Main article: Explanation  While arguments attempt to show that something was, is, will be, or should be the case, explanations try to show why or how something is or will be.
If Fred and Joe address the issue of whether or not Fred's cat has fleas, Joe may state: "Fred, your cat has fleas.
Observe, the cat is scratching right now."
Joe has made an argument that the cat has fleas.
However, if Joe asks Fred, "Why is your cat scratching itself?"
the explanation, "...
because it has fleas."
provides understanding.
Both the above argument and explanation require knowing the generalities that a) fleas often cause itching, and b) that one often scratches to relieve itching.
The difference is in the intent: an argument attempts to settle whether or not some claim is true, and an explanation attempts to provide understanding of the event.
Note, that by subsuming the specific event (of Fred's cat scratching) as an instance of the general rule that "animals scratch themselves when they have fleas", Joe will no longer wonder why Fred's cat is scratching itself.
Arguments address problems of belief, explanations address problems of understanding.
In the argument above, the statement, "Fred's cat has fleas" is up for debate (i.e.
is a claim), but in the explanation, the statement, "Fred's cat has fleas" is assumed to be true (unquestioned at this time) and just needs explaining .
Arguments and explanations largely resemble each other in rhetorical use.
This is the cause of much difficulty in thinking critically about claims.
There are several reasons for this difficulty.
People often are not themselves clear on whether they are arguing for or explaining something.
The same types of words and phrases are used in presenting explanations and arguments.
The terms 'explain' or 'explanation,' et cetera are frequently used in arguments.
Explanations are often used within arguments and presented so as to serve as arguments .
Likewise, "...
arguments are essential to the process of justifying the validity of any explanation as there are often multiple explanations for any given phenomenon."
Explanations and arguments are often studied in the field of information systems to help explain user acceptance of knowledge-based systems .
Certain argument types may fit better with personality traits to enhance acceptance by individuals.
Fallacies and non-arguments   Main article: Fallacy  Fallacies are types of argument or expressions which are held to be of an invalid form or contain errors in reasoning.
One type of fallacy occurs when a word frequently used to indicate a conclusion is used as a transition (conjunctive adverb) between independent clauses.
In English the words therefore , so , because and hence typically separate the premises from the conclusion of an argument.
Thus: Socrates is a man, all men are mortal therefore Socrates is mortal is an argument because the assertion Socrates is mortal follows from the preceding statements.
However, I was thirsty and therefore I drank is not an argument, despite its appearance.
It is not being claimed that I drank is logically entailed by I was thirsty .
The therefore in this sentence indicates for that reason not it follows that .
Elliptical or ethymematic arguments   Often an argument is invalid or weak because there is a missing premise—the supply of which would make it valid or strong.
This is referred to as an elliptical or enthymematic argument (see also Enthymeme § Syllogism with an unstated premise ).
Speakers and writers will often leave out a necessary premise in their reasoning if it is widely accepted and the writer does not wish to state the blindingly obvious.
Example: All metals expand when heated, therefore iron will expand when heated.
The missing premise is: Iron is a metal.
On the other hand, a seemingly valid argument may be found to lack a premise—a "hidden assumption"—which, if highlighted, can show a fault in reasoning.
Example: A witness reasoned: Nobody came out the front door except the milkman; therefore the murderer must have left by the back door.
The hidden assumptions are: (1) the milkman was not the murderer and (2) the murderer has left (3) by a door and (4) not by e.g.
a window or through an 'ole in 't roof and (5) there are no other doors than the front or back door.
Argument mining   Main article: Argument mining  The goal of argument mining is the automatic extraction and identification of argumentative structures from natural language text with the aid of computer programs.
Such argumentative structures include the premise, conclusions, the argument scheme and the relationship between the main and subsidiary argument, or the main and counter-argument within discourse.
Subfield of mathematics  For Quine's theory sometimes called "Mathematical Logic", see New Foundations .
For other uses, see Logic (disambiguation) .
Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Mathematical logic is the study of formal logic within mathematics .
Major subareas include model theory , proof theory , set theory , and recursion theory (also known as computability theory).
Research in mathematical logic commonly addresses the mathematical properties of formal systems of logic such as their expressive or deductive power.
However, it can also include uses of logic to characterize correct mathematical reasoning or to establish foundations of mathematics .
Since its inception, mathematical logic has both contributed to and been motivated by the study of foundations of mathematics.
This study began in the late 19th century with the development of axiomatic frameworks for geometry , arithmetic , and analysis .
In the early 20th century it was shaped by David Hilbert 's program to prove the consistency of foundational theories.
Results of Kurt Gödel , Gerhard Gentzen , and others provided partial resolution to the program, and clarified the issues involved in proving consistency.
Work in set theory showed that almost all ordinary mathematics can be formalized in terms of sets, although there are some theorems that cannot be proven in common axiom systems for set theory.
Contemporary work in the foundations of mathematics often focuses on establishing which parts of mathematics can be formalized in particular formal systems (as in reverse mathematics ) rather than trying to find theories in which all of mathematics can be developed.
Subfields and scope   The Handbook of Mathematical Logic  in 1977 makes a rough division of contemporary mathematical logic into four areas:  set theory  model theory  recursion theory , and  proof theory and constructive mathematics (considered as parts of a single area).
Additionally, sometimes the field of computational complexity theory is also included as part of mathematical logic.
Each area has a distinct focus, although many techniques and results are shared among multiple areas.
The borderlines amongst these fields, and the lines separating mathematical logic and other fields of mathematics, are not always sharp.
Gödel's incompleteness theorem marks not only a milestone in recursion theory and proof theory, but has also led to Löb's theorem in modal logic.
The method of forcing is employed in set theory, model theory, and recursion theory, as well as in the study of intuitionistic mathematics.
The mathematical field of category theory uses many formal axiomatic methods, and includes the study of categorical logic , but category theory is not ordinarily considered a subfield of mathematical logic.
Because of its applicability in diverse fields of mathematics, mathematicians including Saunders Mac Lane have proposed category theory as a foundational system for mathematics, independent of set theory.
These foundations use toposes , which resemble generalized models of set theory that may employ classical or nonclassical logic.
History   Mathematical logic emerged in the mid-19th century as a subfield of mathematics, reflecting the confluence of two traditions: formal philosophical logic and mathematics.
"Mathematical logic, also called  'logistic', 'symbolic logic', the ' algebra of logic ', and, more recently, simply 'formal logic', is the set of logical theories elaborated in the course of the last Nineteenth Century with the aid of an artificial notation and a rigorously deductive method."
Before this emergence, logic was studied with rhetoric , with calculationes ,  through the syllogism , and with philosophy .
The first half of the 20th century saw an explosion of fundamental results, accompanied by vigorous debate over the foundations of mathematics.
Early history   Further information: History of logic  Theories of logic were developed in many cultures in history, including China , India , Greece and the Islamic world .
In 18th-century Europe, attempts to treat the operations of formal logic in a symbolic or algebraic way had been made by philosophical mathematicians including Leibniz and Lambert , but their labors remained isolated and little known.
19th century   In the middle of the nineteenth century, George Boole and then Augustus De Morgan presented systematic mathematical treatments of logic.
Their work, building on work by algebraists such as George Peacock , extended the traditional Aristotelian doctrine of logic into a sufficient framework for the study of foundations of mathematics .
In 1847.
Vatroslav Bertić made substantial work on algebraization of logic, independently from Boole.
Charles Sanders Peirce later built upon the work of Boole to develop a logical system for relations and quantifiers, which he published in several papers from 1870 to 1885.
Gottlob Frege presented an independent development of logic with quantifiers in his Begriffsschrift , published in 1879, a work generally considered as marking a turning point in the history of logic.
Frege's work remained obscure, however, until Bertrand Russell began to promote it near the turn of the century.
The two-dimensional notation Frege developed was never widely adopted and is unused in contemporary texts.
From 1890 to 1905, Ernst Schröder published Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik in three volumes.
This work summarized and extended the work of Boole, De Morgan, and Peirce, and was a comprehensive reference to symbolic logic as it was understood at the end of the 19th century.
Foundational theories   Concerns that mathematics had not been built on a proper foundation led to the development of axiomatic systems for fundamental areas of mathematics such as arithmetic, analysis, and geometry.
In logic, the term arithmetic refers to the theory of the natural numbers .
Giuseppe Peano  published a set of axioms for arithmetic that came to bear his name ( Peano axioms ), using a variation of the logical system of Boole and Schröder but adding quantifiers.
Peano was unaware of Frege's work at the time.
Around the same time Richard Dedekind showed that the natural numbers are uniquely characterized by their induction properties.
Dedekind proposed a different characterization, which lacked the formal logical character of Peano's axioms.
Dedekind's work, however, proved theorems inaccessible in Peano's system, including the uniqueness of the set of natural numbers (up to isomorphism) and the  recursive definitions of addition and multiplication from the successor function and mathematical induction.
In the mid-19th century, flaws in Euclid's axioms for geometry became known.
In addition to the independence of the parallel postulate , established by Nikolai Lobachevsky in 1826,  mathematicians discovered that certain theorems taken for granted by Euclid were not in fact provable from his axioms.
Among these is the theorem that a line contains at least two points, or that circles of the same radius whose centers are separated by that radius must intersect.
Hilbert  developed a complete set of axioms for geometry , building on previous work by Pasch.
The success in axiomatizing geometry motivated Hilbert to seek complete axiomatizations of other areas of mathematics, such as the natural numbers and the real line .
This would prove to be a major area of research in the first half of the 20th century.
The 19th century saw great advances in the theory of real analysis , including theories of convergence of functions and Fourier series .
Mathematicians such as Karl Weierstrass began to construct functions that stretched intuition, such as nowhere-differentiable continuous functions .
Previous conceptions of a function as a rule for computation, or a smooth graph, were no longer adequate.
Weierstrass began to advocate the arithmetization of analysis , which sought to axiomatize analysis using properties of the natural numbers.
The modern (ε, δ)-definition of limit and continuous functions was already developed by Bolzano in 1817,  but remained relatively unknown.
Cauchy in 1821 defined continuity in terms of infinitesimals (see Cours d'Analyse, page 34).
In 1858, Dedekind proposed a definition of the real numbers in terms of Dedekind cuts of rational numbers, a definition still employed in contemporary texts.
Georg Cantor developed the fundamental concepts of infinite set theory.
His early results developed the theory of cardinality and proved that the reals and the natural numbers have different cardinalities.
Over the next twenty years, Cantor developed a theory of transfinite numbers in a series of publications.
In 1891, he published a new proof of the uncountability of the real numbers that introduced the diagonal argument , and used this method to prove Cantor's theorem that no set can have the same cardinality as its powerset .
Cantor believed that every set could be well-ordered , but was unable to produce a proof for this result, leaving it as an open problem in 1895.
20th century   In the early decades of the 20th century, the main areas of study were set theory and formal logic.
The discovery of paradoxes in informal set theory caused some to wonder whether mathematics itself is inconsistent, and to look for proofs of consistency.
In 1900, Hilbert posed a famous list of 23 problems for the next century.
The first two of these were to resolve the continuum hypothesis and prove the consistency of elementary arithmetic, respectively; the tenth was to produce a method that could decide whether a multivariate polynomial equation over the integers has a solution.
Subsequent work to resolve these problems shaped the direction of mathematical logic, as did the effort to resolve Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem , posed in 1928.
This problem asked for a procedure that would decide, given a formalized mathematical statement, whether the statement is true or false.
Set theory and paradoxes   Ernst Zermelo gave a proof that every set could be well-ordered , a result Georg Cantor had been unable to obtain.
To achieve the proof, Zermelo introduced the axiom of choice , which drew heated debate and research among mathematicians and the pioneers of set theory.
The immediate criticism of the method led Zermelo to publish a second exposition of his result, directly addressing criticisms of his proof.
This paper led to the general acceptance of the axiom of choice in the mathematics community.
Skepticism about the axiom of choice was reinforced by recently discovered paradoxes in naive set theory .
Cesare Burali-Forti  was the first to state a paradox: the Burali-Forti paradox shows that the collection of all ordinal numbers cannot form a set.
Very soon thereafter, Bertrand Russell discovered Russell's paradox in 1901, and Jules Richard discovered Richard's paradox .
Zermelo provided the first set of axioms for set theory.
These axioms, together with the additional axiom of replacement proposed by Abraham Fraenkel , are now called Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF).
Zermelo's axioms incorporated the principle of limitation of size to avoid Russell's paradox.
In 1910, the first volume of Principia Mathematica by Russell and Alfred North Whitehead was published.
This seminal work developed the theory of functions and cardinality in a completely formal framework of type theory , which Russell and Whitehead developed in an effort to avoid the paradoxes.
Principia Mathematica is considered one of the most influential works of the 20th century, although the framework of type theory did not prove popular as a foundational theory for mathematics.
Fraenkel  proved that the axiom of choice cannot be proved from the axioms of Zermelo's set theory with urelements .
Later work by Paul Cohen  showed that the addition of urelements is not needed, and the axiom of choice is unprovable in ZF.
Cohen's proof developed the method of forcing , which is now an important tool for establishing independence results in set theory.
Symbolic logic   Leopold Löwenheim  and Thoralf Skolem  obtained the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem , which says that first-order logic cannot control the cardinalities of infinite structures.
Skolem realized that this theorem would apply to first-order formalizations of set theory, and that it implies any such formalization has a countable  model .
This counterintuitive fact became known as Skolem's paradox .
In his doctoral thesis, Kurt Gödel proved the completeness theorem , which establishes a correspondence between syntax and semantics in first-order logic.
Gödel used the completeness theorem to prove the compactness theorem , demonstrating the finitary nature of first-order logical consequence .
These results helped establish first-order logic as the dominant logic used by mathematicians.
In 1931, Gödel published On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems , which proved the incompleteness (in a different meaning of the word) of all sufficiently strong, effective first-order theories.
This result, known as Gödel's incompleteness theorem , establishes severe limitations on axiomatic foundations for mathematics, striking a strong blow to Hilbert's program.
It showed the impossibility of providing a consistency proof of arithmetic within any formal theory of arithmetic.
Hilbert, however, did not acknowledge the importance of the incompleteness theorem for some time.
Gödel's theorem shows that a consistency proof of any sufficiently strong, effective axiom system cannot be obtained in the system itself, if the system is consistent, nor in any weaker system.
This leaves open the possibility of consistency proofs that cannot be formalized within the system they consider.
Gentzen proved the consistency of arithmetic using a finitistic system together with a principle of transfinite induction .
Gentzen's result introduced the ideas of cut elimination and proof-theoretic ordinals , which became key tools in proof theory.
Gödel gave a different consistency proof, which reduces the consistency of classical arithmetic to that of intuitionistic arithmetic in higher types.
The first textbook on symbolic logic for the layman was written by Lewis Carroll ,  author of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland , in 1896.
Beginnings of the other branches   Alfred Tarski developed the basics of model theory .
Beginning in 1935, a group of prominent mathematicians collaborated under the pseudonym Nicolas Bourbaki to publish Éléments de mathématique , a series of encyclopedic mathematics texts.
These texts, written in an austere and axiomatic style, emphasized rigorous presentation and set-theoretic foundations.
Terminology coined by these texts, such as the words bijection , injection , and surjection , and the set-theoretic foundations the texts employed, were widely adopted throughout mathematics.
The study of computability came to be known as recursion theory or computability theory , because early formalizations by Gödel and Kleene relied on recursive definitions of functions.
When these definitions were shown equivalent to Turing's formalization involving Turing machines , it became clear that a new concept – the computable function – had been discovered, and that this definition was robust enough to admit numerous independent characterizations.
In his work on the incompleteness theorems in 1931, Gödel lacked a rigorous concept of an effective formal system; he immediately realized that the new definitions of computability could be used for this purpose, allowing him to state the incompleteness theorems in generality that could only be implied in the original paper.
Numerous results in recursion theory were obtained in the 1940s by Stephen Cole Kleene and Emil Leon Post .
Kleene  introduced the concepts of relative computability, foreshadowed by Turing,  and the arithmetical hierarchy .
Kleene later generalized recursion theory to higher-order functionals.
Kleene and Georg Kreisel studied formal versions of intuitionistic mathematics, particularly in the context of proof theory.
Formal logical systems   Logical connectives   AND      A  ∧  B    {\displaystyle A\land B}   ,     A  ⋅  B    {\displaystyle A\cdot B}   ,     A  B    {\displaystyle AB}   ,     A  &  B    {\displaystyle A\&B}   ,     A  &  &  B    {\displaystyle A\&\&B}    equivalent      A  ≡  B    {\displaystyle A\equiv B}   ,     A  ⇔  B    {\displaystyle A\Leftrightarrow B}   ,     A  ⇋  B    {\displaystyle A\leftrightharpoons B}    implies      A  ⇒  B    {\displaystyle A\Rightarrow B}   ,     A  ⊃  B    {\displaystyle A\supset B}   ,     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\rightarrow B}    NAND      A    ∧  ¯    B    {\displaystyle A{\overline {\land }}B}   ,     A  ↑  B    {\displaystyle A\uparrow B}   ,     A  ∣  B    {\displaystyle A\mid B}   ,        A  ⋅  B   ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {A\cdot B}}}   nonequivalent      A  ≢  B    {\displaystyle A\not \equiv B}   ,     A  ⇎  B    {\displaystyle A\not \Leftrightarrow B}   ,     A  ↮  B    {\displaystyle A\nleftrightarrow B}    NOR      A    ∨  ¯    B    {\displaystyle A{\overline {\lor }}B}   ,     A  ↓  B    {\displaystyle A\downarrow B}   ,        A  +  B   ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {A+B}}}    NOT      ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg A}   ,     −  A    {\displaystyle -A}   ,       A  ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {A}}}   ,     ∼  A    {\displaystyle \sim A}    OR      A  ∨  B    {\displaystyle A\lor B}   ,     A  +  B    {\displaystyle A+B}   ,     A  ∣  B    {\displaystyle A\mid B}   ,     A  ∥  B    {\displaystyle A\parallel B}    XNOR      A     XNOR     B    {\displaystyle A\ {\text{XNOR}}\ B}    XOR      A    ∨  _    B    {\displaystyle A{\underline {\lor }}B}   ,     A  ⊕  B    {\displaystyle A\oplus B}    converse      A  ⇐  B    {\displaystyle A\Leftarrow B}   ,     A  ⊂  B    {\displaystyle A\subset B}   ,     A  ←  B    {\displaystyle A\leftarrow B}    Related concepts  Propositional calculus Predicate logic Boolean algebra Truth table Truth function Boolean function Functional completeness  Applications  Digital logic Programming languages Mathematical logic Philosophy of logic    Category v t e  At its core, mathematical logic deals with mathematical concepts expressed using formal logical systems .
These systems, though they differ in many details, share the common property of considering only expressions in a fixed formal language .
The systems of propositional logic and first-order logic are the most widely studied today, because of their applicability to foundations of mathematics and because of their desirable proof-theoretic properties.
Stronger classical logics such as second-order logic or infinitary logic are also studied, along with Non-classical logics such as intuitionistic logic .
First-order logic   Main article: First-order logic  First-order logic is a particular formal system of logic .
Its syntax involves only finite expressions as well-formed formulas , while its semantics are characterized by the limitation of all quantifiers to a fixed domain of discourse .
Early results from formal logic established limitations of first-order logic.
The Löwenheim–Skolem theorem (1919) showed that if a set of sentences in a countable first-order language has an infinite model then it has at least one model of each infinite cardinality.
This shows that it is impossible for a set of first-order axioms to characterize the natural numbers, the real numbers, or any other infinite structure up to isomorphism .
As the goal of early foundational studies was to produce axiomatic theories for all parts of mathematics, this limitation was particularly stark.
Gödel's completeness theorem established the equivalence between semantic and syntactic definitions of logical consequence in first-order logic.
It shows that if a particular sentence is true in every model that satisfies a particular set of axioms, then there must be a finite deduction of the sentence from the axioms.
The compactness theorem first appeared as a lemma in Gödel's proof of the completeness theorem, and it took many years before logicians grasped its significance and began to apply it routinely.
It says that a set of sentences has a model if and only if every finite subset has a model, or in other words that an inconsistent set of formulas must have a finite inconsistent subset.
The completeness and compactness theorems allow for sophisticated analysis of logical consequence in first-order logic and the development of model theory , and they are a key reason for the prominence of first-order logic in mathematics.
Gödel's incompleteness theorems establish additional limits on first-order axiomatizations.
The first incompleteness theorem states that for any consistent, effectively given (defined below) logical system that is capable of interpreting arithmetic, there exists a statement that is true (in the sense that it holds for the natural numbers) but not provable within that logical system (and which indeed may fail in some non-standard models of arithmetic which may be consistent with the logical system).
For example, in every logical system capable of expressing the Peano axioms , the Gödel sentence holds for the natural numbers but cannot be proved.
Here a logical system is said to be effectively given if it is possible to decide, given any formula in the language of the system, whether the formula is an axiom, and one which can express the Peano axioms is called "sufficiently strong."
When applied to first-order logic, the first incompleteness theorem implies that any sufficiently strong, consistent, effective first-order theory has models that are not elementarily equivalent , a stronger limitation than the one established by the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem.
The second incompleteness theorem states that no sufficiently strong, consistent, effective axiom system for arithmetic can prove its own consistency, which has been interpreted to show that Hilbert's program cannot be reached.
Other classical logics   Many logics besides first-order logic are studied.
These include infinitary logics , which allow for formulas to provide an infinite amount of information, and higher-order logics , which include a portion of set theory directly in their semantics.
The most well studied infinitary logic is      L    ω   1    ,  ω      {\displaystyle L_{\omega _{1},\omega }}   .
In this logic, quantifiers may only be nested to finite depths, as in first-order logic, but formulas may have finite or countably infinite conjunctions and disjunctions within them.
Thus, for example, it is possible to say that an object is a whole number using a formula of      L    ω   1    ,  ω      {\displaystyle L_{\omega _{1},\omega }}   such as      (  x  =  0  )  ∨  (  x  =  1  )  ∨  (  x  =  2  )  ∨  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle (x=0)\lor (x=1)\lor (x=2)\lor \cdots .}
Higher-order logics allow for quantification not only of elements of the domain of discourse , but subsets of the domain of discourse, sets of such subsets, and other objects of higher type.
The semantics are defined so that, rather than having a separate domain for each higher-type quantifier to range over, the quantifiers instead range over all objects of the appropriate type.
The logics studied before the development of first-order logic, for example Frege's logic, had similar set-theoretic aspects.
Although higher-order logics are more expressive, allowing complete axiomatizations of structures such as the natural numbers, they do not satisfy analogues of the completeness and compactness theorems from first-order logic, and are thus less amenable to proof-theoretic analysis.
Another type of logics are fixed-point logic s that allow inductive definitions , like one writes for primitive recursive functions .
One can formally define an extension of first-order logic — a notion which encompasses all logics in this section because they behave like first-order logic in certain fundamental ways, but does not encompass all logics in general, e.g.
it does not encompass intuitionistic, modal or fuzzy logic .
Lindström's theorem implies that the only extension of first-order logic satisfying both the compactness theorem and the downward Löwenheim–Skolem theorem is first-order logic.
Nonclassical and modal logic   Main article: Non-classical logic  Modal logics include additional modal operators, such as an operator which states that a particular formula is not only true, but necessarily true.
Although modal logic is not often used to axiomatize mathematics, it has been used to study the properties of first-order provability  and set-theoretic forcing.
Intuitionistic logic was developed by Heyting to study Brouwer's program of intuitionism, in which Brouwer himself avoided formalization.
Intuitionistic logic specifically does not include the law of the excluded middle , which states that each sentence is either true or its negation is true.
Kleene's work with the proof theory of intuitionistic logic showed that constructive information can be recovered from intuitionistic proofs.
For example, any provably total function in intuitionistic arithmetic is computable ; this is not true in classical theories of arithmetic such as Peano arithmetic .
Algebraic logic   Algebraic logic uses the methods of abstract algebra to study the semantics of formal logics.
A fundamental example is the use of Boolean algebras to represent truth values in classical propositional logic, and the use of Heyting algebras to represent truth values in intuitionistic propositional logic.
Stronger logics, such as first-order logic and higher-order logic, are studied using more complicated algebraic structures such as cylindric algebras .
Set theory   Main article: Set theory  Set theory is the study of sets , which are abstract collections of objects.
Many of the basic notions, such as ordinal and cardinal numbers, were developed informally by Cantor before formal axiomatizations of set theory were developed.
The first such axiomatization , due to Zermelo,  was extended slightly to become Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF), which is now the most widely used foundational theory for mathematics.
Other formalizations of set theory have been proposed, including von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG), Morse–Kelley set theory (MK), and New Foundations (NF).
Of these, ZF, NBG, and MK are similar in describing a cumulative hierarchy of sets.
New Foundations takes a different approach; it allows objects such as the set of all sets at the cost of restrictions on its set-existence axioms.
The system of Kripke–Platek set theory is closely related to generalized recursion theory.
Two famous statements in set theory are the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis .
The axiom of choice, first stated by Zermelo,  was proved independent of ZF by Fraenkel,  but has come to be widely accepted by mathematicians.
It states that given a collection of nonempty sets there is a single set C that contains exactly one element from each set in the collection.
The set C is said to "choose" one element from each set in the collection.
While the ability to make such a choice is considered obvious by some, since each set in the collection is nonempty, the lack of a general, concrete rule by which the choice can be made renders the axiom nonconstructive.
Stefan Banach and Alfred Tarski showed that the axiom of choice can be used to decompose a solid ball into a finite number of pieces which can then be rearranged, with no scaling, to make two solid balls of the original size.
This theorem, known as the Banach–Tarski paradox , is one of many counterintuitive results of the axiom of choice.
The continuum hypothesis, first proposed as a conjecture by Cantor, was listed by David Hilbert as one of his 23 problems in 1900.
Gödel showed that the continuum hypothesis cannot be disproven from the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (with or without the axiom of choice), by developing the constructible universe of set theory in which the continuum hypothesis must hold.
In 1963, Paul Cohen showed that the continuum hypothesis cannot be proven from the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory.
This independence result did not completely settle Hilbert's question, however, as it is possible that new axioms for set theory could resolve the hypothesis.
Recent work along these lines has been conducted by W.
Hugh Woodin , although its importance is not yet clear.
Contemporary research in set theory includes the study of large cardinals and determinacy .
Large cardinals are cardinal numbers with particular properties so strong that the existence of such cardinals cannot be proved in ZFC.
The existence of the smallest large cardinal typically studied, an inaccessible cardinal , already implies the consistency of ZFC.
Despite the fact that large cardinals have extremely high cardinality , their existence has many ramifications for the structure of the real line.
Determinacy refers to the possible existence of winning strategies for certain two-player games (the games are said to be determined ).
The existence of these strategies implies structural properties of the real line and other Polish spaces .
Model theory   Main article: Model theory  Model theory studies the models of various formal theories.
Here a theory is a set of formulas in a particular formal logic and signature , while a model is a structure that gives a concrete interpretation of the theory.
Model theory is closely related to universal algebra and algebraic geometry , although the methods of model theory focus more on logical considerations than those fields.
The set of all models of a particular theory is called an elementary class ; classical model theory seeks to determine the properties of models in a particular elementary class, or determine whether certain classes of structures form elementary classes.
The method of quantifier elimination can be used to show that definable sets in particular theories cannot be too complicated.
Tarski established quantifier elimination for real-closed fields , a result which also shows the theory of the field of real numbers is decidable .
He also noted that his methods were equally applicable to algebraically closed fields of arbitrary characteristic.
A modern subfield developing from this is concerned with o-minimal structures .
Morley's categoricity theorem , proved by Michael D.
Morley ,  states that if a first-order theory in a countable language is categorical in some uncountable cardinality, i.e.
all models of this cardinality are isomorphic, then it is categorical in all uncountable cardinalities.
A trivial consequence of the continuum hypothesis is that a complete theory with less than continuum many nonisomorphic countable models can have only countably many.
Vaught's conjecture , named after Robert Lawson Vaught , says that this is true even independently of the continuum hypothesis.
Many special cases of this conjecture have been established.
Recursion theory   Main article: Recursion theory  Recursion theory , also called computability theory , studies the properties of computable functions and the Turing degrees , which divide the uncomputable functions into sets that have the same level of uncomputability.
Recursion theory also includes the study of generalized computability and definability.
Recursion theory grew from the work of Rózsa Péter , Alonzo Church and Alan Turing in the 1930s, which was greatly extended by Kleene and Post in the 1940s.
Classical recursion theory focuses on the computability of functions from the natural numbers to the natural numbers.
The fundamental results establish a robust, canonical class of computable functions with numerous independent, equivalent characterizations using Turing machines , λ calculus , and other systems.
More advanced results concern the structure of the Turing degrees and the lattice of recursively enumerable sets .
Generalized recursion theory extends the ideas of recursion theory to computations that are no longer necessarily finite.
It includes the study of computability in higher types as well as areas such as hyperarithmetical theory and α-recursion theory .
Contemporary research in recursion theory includes the study of applications such as algorithmic randomness , computable model theory , and reverse mathematics , as well as new results in pure recursion theory.
Algorithmically unsolvable problems   An important subfield of recursion theory studies algorithmic unsolvability; a decision problem or function problem is algorithmically unsolvable if there is no possible computable algorithm that returns the correct answer for all legal inputs to the problem.
The first results about unsolvability, obtained independently by Church and Turing in 1936, showed that the Entscheidungsproblem is algorithmically unsolvable.
Turing proved this by establishing the unsolvability of the halting problem , a result with far-ranging implications in both recursion theory and computer science.
There are many known examples of undecidable problems from ordinary mathematics.
The word problem for groups was proved algorithmically unsolvable by Pyotr Novikov in 1955 and independently by W.
Boone in 1959.
The busy beaver problem, developed by Tibor Radó in 1962, is another well-known example.
Hilbert's tenth problem asked for an algorithm to determine whether a multivariate polynomial equation with integer coefficients has a solution in the integers.
Partial progress was made by Julia Robinson , Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam .
The algorithmic unsolvability of the problem was proved by Yuri Matiyasevich in 1970.
Proof theory and constructive mathematics   Main article: Proof theory  Proof theory is the study of formal proofs in various logical deduction systems.
These proofs are represented as formal mathematical objects, facilitating their analysis by mathematical techniques.
Several deduction systems are commonly considered, including Hilbert-style deduction systems , systems of natural deduction , and the sequent calculus developed by Gentzen.
The study of constructive mathematics , in the context of mathematical logic, includes the study of systems in non-classical logic such as intuitionistic logic, as well as the study of predicative systems.
An early proponent of predicativism was Hermann Weyl , who showed it is possible to develop a large part of real analysis using only predicative methods.
Because proofs are entirely finitary, whereas truth in a structure is not, it is common for work in constructive mathematics to emphasize provability.
The relationship between provability in classical (or nonconstructive) systems and provability in intuitionistic (or constructive, respectively) systems is of particular interest.
Results such as the Gödel–Gentzen negative translation show that it is possible to embed (or translate ) classical logic into intuitionistic logic, allowing some properties about intuitionistic proofs to be transferred back to classical proofs.
Recent developments in proof theory include the study of proof mining by Ulrich Kohlenbach and the study of proof-theoretic ordinals by Michael Rathjen .
Applications   "Mathematical logic has been successfully applied not only to mathematics and its foundations ( G.
Frege , B.
Russell , D.
Hilbert , P.
Bernays , H.
Scholz , R.
Carnap , S.
Lesniewski , T.
Skolem ), but also to physics (R.
Carnap, A.
Dittrich, B.
Russell, C.
E.
Shannon , A.
N.
Whitehead , H.
Reichenbach , P.
Fevrier), to biology ( J.
H.
Woodger , A.
Tarski ), to psychology ( F.
B.
Fitch , C.
G.
Hempel ), to law and morals ( K.
Menger , U.
Klug, P.
Oppenheim), to economics ( J.
Neumann , O.
Morgenstern ), to practical questions ( E.
C.
Berkeley , E.
Stamm), and even to metaphysics (J.
 Salamucha, H.
Scholz, J.
M.
Bochenski ).
Its applications to the history of logic have proven extremely fruitful ( J.
Lukasiewicz , H.
Scholz, B.
Mates , A.
Becker, E.
Moody , J.
Salamucha, K.
Duerr, Z.
Jordan, P.
Boehner , J.
M.
Bochenski, S.
 T.
Schayer, D.
Ingalls )."
"Applications have also been made to theology (F.
Drewnowski, J.
Salamucha, I.
Thomas)."
Connections with computer science   Main article: Logic in computer science  The study of computability theory in computer science is closely related to the study of computability in mathematical logic.
There is a difference of emphasis, however.
Computer scientists often focus on concrete programming languages and feasible computability , while researchers in mathematical logic often focus on computability as a theoretical concept and on noncomputability.
The theory of semantics of programming languages is related to model theory , as is program verification (in particular, model checking ).
The Curry–Howard correspondence between proofs and programs relates to proof theory , especially intuitionistic logic .
Formal calculi such as the lambda calculus and combinatory logic are now studied as idealized programming languages .
Computer science also contributes to mathematics by developing techniques for the automatic checking or even finding of proofs, such as automated theorem proving and logic programming .
Descriptive complexity theory relates logics to computational complexity .
The first significant result in this area, Fagin's theorem (1974) established that NP is precisely the set of languages expressible by sentences of existential second-order logic .
Foundations of mathematics   Main article: Foundations of mathematics  In the 19th century, mathematicians became aware of logical gaps and inconsistencies in their field.
It was shown that Euclid 's axioms for geometry, which had been taught for centuries as an example of the axiomatic method, were incomplete.
The use of infinitesimals , and the very definition of function , came into question in analysis, as pathological examples such as Weierstrass' nowhere- differentiable continuous function were discovered.
Cantor's study of arbitrary infinite sets also drew criticism.
Leopold Kronecker famously stated "God made the integers; all else is the work of man," endorsing a return to the study of finite, concrete objects in mathematics.
Although Kronecker's argument was carried forward by constructivists in the 20th century, the mathematical community as a whole rejected them.
David Hilbert argued in favor of the study of the infinite, saying "No one shall expel us from the Paradise that Cantor has created."
Mathematicians began to search for axiom systems that could be used to formalize large parts of mathematics.
In addition to removing ambiguity from previously naive terms such as function, it was hoped that this axiomatization would allow for consistency proofs.
In the 19th century, the main method of proving the consistency of a set of axioms was to provide a model for it.
Thus, for example, non-Euclidean geometry can be proved consistent by defining point to mean a point on a fixed sphere and line to mean a great circle on the sphere.
The resulting structure, a model of elliptic geometry , satisfies the axioms of plane geometry except the parallel postulate.
With the development of formal logic, Hilbert asked whether it would be possible to prove that an axiom system is consistent by analyzing the structure of possible proofs in the system, and showing through this analysis that it is impossible to prove a contradiction.
This idea led to the study of proof theory .
Moreover, Hilbert proposed that the analysis should be entirely concrete, using the term finitary to refer to the methods he would allow but not precisely defining them.
This project, known as Hilbert's program , was seriously affected by Gödel's incompleteness theorems, which show that the consistency of formal theories of arithmetic cannot be established using methods formalizable in those theories.
Gentzen showed that it is possible to produce a proof of the consistency of arithmetic in a finitary system augmented with axioms of transfinite induction , and the techniques he developed to do so were seminal in proof theory.
A second thread in the history of foundations of mathematics involves nonclassical logics and constructive mathematics .
The study of constructive mathematics includes many different programs with various definitions of constructive .
At the most accommodating end, proofs in ZF set theory that do not use the axiom of choice are called constructive by many mathematicians.
More limited versions of constructivism limit themselves to natural numbers , number-theoretic functions , and sets of natural numbers (which can be used to represent real numbers, facilitating the study of mathematical analysis ).
A common idea is that a concrete means of computing the values of the function must be known before the function itself can be said to exist.
In the early 20th century, Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer founded intuitionism as a part of philosophy of mathematics .
This philosophy, poorly understood at first, stated that in order for a mathematical statement to be true to a mathematician, that person must be able to intuit the statement, to not only believe its truth but understand the reason for its truth.
A consequence of this definition of truth was the rejection of the law of the excluded middle , for there are statements that, according to Brouwer, could not be claimed to be true while their negations also could not be claimed true.
Brouwer's philosophy was influential, and the cause of bitter disputes among prominent mathematicians.
Later, Kleene and Kreisel would study formalized versions of intuitionistic logic (Brouwer rejected formalization, and presented his work in unformalized natural language).
With the advent of the BHK interpretation and Kripke models , intuitionism became easier to reconcile with classical mathematics .
Sequence of words formed by specific rules  This article is about a technical term in mathematics and computer science.
For any formal type of language usage, see Literary language .
For studies about natural languages, see Formal semantics (natural language) .
Find sources:  "Formal language" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Part of a series on Formal languages  Key concepts  Formal system  Alphabet  Syntax  Semantics (computer science)  Semantics (logic)  Formal grammar  Automata theory  Ground expression  Regular expression  Well-formed formula   Applications  Formal methods  Propositional calculus  Predicate logic  Mathematical notation  Natural language processing  Programming language theory  Computational linguistics  Syntax analysis  Formal verification  v t e    Structure of the syntactically well-formed, although nonsensical, English sentence, "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" ( historical example from Chomsky 1957)  In logic , mathematics , computer science , and linguistics , a formal language consists of words whose letters are taken from an alphabet and are well-formed according to a specific set of rules called a formal grammar .
The alphabet of a formal language consists of symbols, letters, or tokens that concatenate into strings called words.
Words that belong to a particular formal language are sometimes called well-formed words or well-formed formulas .
A formal language is often defined by means of a formal grammar such as a regular grammar or context-free grammar , which consists of its formation rules .
In computer science, formal languages are used, among others, as the basis for defining the grammar of programming languages and formalized versions of subsets of natural languages, in which the words of the language represent concepts that are associated with meanings or semantics .
In computational complexity theory , decision problems are typically defined as formal languages, and complexity classes are defined as the sets of the formal languages that can be parsed by machines with limited computational power.
In logic and the foundations of mathematics , formal languages are used to represent the syntax of axiomatic systems , and mathematical formalism is the philosophy that all of mathematics can be reduced to the syntactic manipulation of formal languages in this way.
The field of formal language theory studies primarily the purely syntactic aspects of such languages—that is, their internal structural patterns.
Formal language theory sprang out of linguistics, as a way of understanding the syntactic regularities of natural languages .
( March 2021 )  In the 17th century, Gottfried Leibniz imagined and described the characteristica universalis , a universal and formal language which utilised pictographs .
Later, Carl Friedrich Gauss investigated the problem of Gauss codes .
Gottlob Frege attempted to realize Leibniz's ideas, through a notational system first outlined in Begriffsschrift (1879) and more fully developed in his 2-volume Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (1893/1903).
This described a "formal language of pure language."
In the first half of the 20th century, several developments were made with relevance to formal languages.
Axel Thue published four papers relating to words and language between 1906 and 1914.
The last of these introduced what Emil Post later termed 'Thue Systems', and gave an early example of an undecidable problem .
Post would later use this paper as the basis for a 1947 proof "that the word problem for semigroups was recursively insoluble",  and later devised the canonical system for the creation of formal languages.
In 1907, Leonardo Torres Quevedo introduced a formal language for the description of mechanical drawings (mechanical devices), in Vienna .
He published "Sobre un sistema de notaciones y símbolos destinados a facilitar la descripción de las máquinas" ("On a system of notations and symbols intended to facilitate the description of machines").
Heinz Zemanek rated it as an equivalent to a programming language for the numerical control of machine tools.
Noam Chomsky devised an abstract representation of formal and natural languages, known as the Chomsky hierarchy .
In 1959 John Backus developed the Backus-Naur form to describe the syntax of a high level programming language, following his work in the creation of FORTRAN .
Peter Naur was the secretary/editor for the ALGOL60 Report in which he used Backus–Naur form to describe the Formal part of ALGOL60.
Words over an alphabet   An alphabet , in the context of formal languages, can be any set ; its elements are called letters .
An alphabet may contain an infinite number of elements;  however, most definitions in formal language theory specify alphabets with a finite number of elements, and many results apply only to them.
It often makes sense to use an alphabet in the usual sense of the word, or more generally any finite character encoding such as ASCII or Unicode .
A word over an alphabet can be any finite sequence (i.e., string ) of letters.
The set of all words over an alphabet Σ is usually denoted by Σ * (using the Kleene star ).
The length of a word is the number of letters it is composed of.
For any alphabet, there is only one word of length 0, the empty word , which is often denoted by e, ε, λ or even Λ.
By concatenation one can combine two words to form a new word, whose length is the sum of the lengths of the original words.
The result of concatenating a word with the empty word is the original word.
In some applications, especially in logic , the alphabet is also known as the vocabulary and words are known as formulas or sentences ; this breaks the letter/word metaphor and replaces it by a word/sentence metaphor.
Definition   A formal language L over an alphabet Σ is a subset of Σ * , that is, a set of words over that alphabet.
Sometimes the sets of words are grouped into expressions, whereas rules and constraints may be formulated for the creation of 'well-formed expressions'.
In computer science and mathematics, which do not usually deal with natural languages , the adjective "formal" is often omitted as redundant.
While formal language theory usually concerns itself with formal languages that are described by some syntactic rules, the actual definition of the concept "formal language" is only as above: a (possibly infinite) set of finite-length strings composed from a given alphabet, no more and no less.
In practice, there are many languages that can be described by rules, such as regular languages or context-free languages .
The notion of a formal grammar may be closer to the intuitive concept of a "language", one described by syntactic rules.
By an abuse of the definition, a particular formal language is often thought of as being accompanied with a formal grammar that describes it.
Examples   The following rules describe a formal language L over the alphabet Σ = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, +, =}:  Every nonempty string that does not contain "+" or "=" and does not start with "0" is in L .
The string "0" is in L .
A string containing "=" is in L if and only if there is exactly one "=", and it separates two valid strings of L .
A string containing "+" but not "=" is in L if and only if every "+" in the string separates two valid strings of L .
No string is in L other than those implied by the previous rules.
Under these rules, the string "23+4=555" is in L , but the string "=234=+" is not.
This formal language expresses natural numbers , well-formed additions, and well-formed addition equalities, but it expresses only what they look like (their syntax ), not what they mean ( semantics ).
For instance, nowhere in these rules is there any indication that "0" means the number zero, "+" means addition, "23+4=555" is false, etc.
Constructions   For finite languages, one can explicitly enumerate all well-formed words.
For example, we can describe a language L as just L = {a, b, ab, cba}.
The degenerate case of this construction is the empty language , which contains no words at all ( L = ∅ ).
However, even over a finite (non-empty) alphabet such as Σ = {a, b} there are an infinite number of finite-length words that can potentially be expressed: "a", "abb", "ababba", "aaababbbbaab", ....
Therefore, formal languages are typically infinite, and describing an infinite formal language is not as simple as writing L = {a, b, ab, cba}.
Here are some examples of formal languages:  L = Σ * , the set of all words over Σ;  L = {a} * = {a n }, where n ranges over the natural numbers and "a n " means "a" repeated n times (this is the set of words consisting only of the symbol "a");  the set of syntactically correct programs in a given programming language (the syntax of which is usually defined by a context-free grammar );  the set of inputs upon which a certain Turing machine halts; or  the set of maximal strings of alphanumeric  ASCII characters on this line, i.e., the set {the, set, of, maximal, strings, alphanumeric, ASCII, characters, on, this, line, i, e}.
Language-specification formalisms   Formal languages are used as tools in multiple disciplines.
However, formal language theory rarely concerns itself with particular languages (except as examples), but is mainly concerned with the study of various types of formalisms to describe languages.
For instance, a language can be given as  those strings generated by some formal grammar ;  those strings described or matched by a particular regular expression ;  those strings accepted by some automaton , such as a Turing machine or finite-state automaton ;  those strings for which some decision procedure (an algorithm that asks a sequence of related YES/NO questions) produces the answer YES.
Typical questions asked about such formalisms include:  What is their expressive power?
(Can formalism X describe every language that formalism Y can describe?
Can it describe other languages?)
What is their recognizability?
(How difficult is it to decide whether a given word belongs to a language described by formalism X ?)
What is their comparability?
(How difficult is it to decide whether two languages, one described in formalism X and one in formalism Y , or in X again, are actually the same language?).
Surprisingly often, the answer to these decision problems is "it cannot be done at all", or "it is extremely expensive" (with a characterization of how expensive).
Therefore, formal language theory is a major application area of computability theory and complexity theory .
Formal languages may be classified in the Chomsky hierarchy based on the expressive power of their generative grammar as well as the complexity of their recognizing automaton .
Context-free grammars and regular grammars provide a good compromise between expressivity and ease of parsing , and are widely used in practical applications.
Operations on languages   Certain operations on languages are common.
This includes the standard set operations, such as union, intersection, and complement.
Another class of operation is the element-wise application of string operations.
Examples: suppose      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   and      L   2      {\displaystyle L_{2}}   are languages over some common alphabet     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   .
The concatenation       L   1    ⋅   L   2      {\displaystyle L_{1}\cdot L_{2}}   consists of all strings of the form     v  w    {\displaystyle vw}   where     v    {\displaystyle v}   is a string from      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   and     w    {\displaystyle w}   is a string from      L   2      {\displaystyle L_{2}}   .
The intersection       L   1    ∩   L   2      {\displaystyle L_{1}\cap L_{2}}   of      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   and      L   2      {\displaystyle L_{2}}   consists of all strings that are contained in both languages  The complement      ¬   L   1      {\displaystyle \neg L_{1}}   of      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   with respect to     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   consists of all strings over     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   that are not in      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   .
The Kleene star : the language consisting of all words that are concatenations of zero or more words in the original language;  Reversal : Let ε be the empty word, then      ε   R    =  ε    {\displaystyle \varepsilon ^{R}=\varepsilon }   , and  for each non-empty word     w  =   σ   1    ⋯   σ   n      {\displaystyle w=\sigma _{1}\cdots \sigma _{n}}   (where      σ   1    ,  …  ,   σ   n      {\displaystyle \sigma _{1},\ldots ,\sigma _{n}}   are elements of some alphabet), let      w   R    =   σ   n    ⋯   σ   1      {\displaystyle w^{R}=\sigma _{n}\cdots \sigma _{1}}   ,  then for a formal language     L    {\displaystyle L}   ,      L   R    =  {   w   R    ∣  w  ∈  L  }    {\displaystyle L^{R}=\{w^{R}\mid w\in L\}}   .
String homomorphism  Such string operations are used to investigate closure properties of classes of languages.
A class of languages is closed under a particular operation when the operation, applied to languages in the class, always produces a language in the same class again.
For instance, the context-free languages are known to be closed under union, concatenation, and intersection with regular languages , but not closed under intersection or complement.
The theory of trios and abstract families of languages studies the most common closure properties of language families in their own right.
Closure properties of language families (      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   Op      L   2      {\displaystyle L_{2}}   where both      L   1      {\displaystyle L_{1}}   and      L   2      {\displaystyle L_{2}}   are in the language family given by the column).
After Hopcroft and Ullman.
Operation    Regular   DCFL   CFL   IND   CSL   recursive   RE    Union        L   1    ∪   L   2    =  {  w  ∣  w  ∈   L   1    ∨  w  ∈   L   2    }    {\displaystyle L_{1}\cup L_{2}=\{w\mid w\in L_{1}\lor w\in L_{2}\}}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   Intersection        L   1    ∩   L   2    =  {  w  ∣  w  ∈   L   1    ∧  w  ∈   L   2    }    {\displaystyle L_{1}\cap L_{2}=\{w\mid w\in L_{1}\land w\in L_{2}\}}     Yes  No  No  No  Yes  Yes  Yes   Complement       ¬   L   1    =  {  w  ∣  w  ∉   L   1    }    {\displaystyle \neg L_{1}=\{w\mid w\not \in L_{1}\}}     Yes  Yes  No  No  Yes  Yes  No   Concatenation        L   1    ⋅   L   2    =  {  w  z  ∣  w  ∈   L   1    ∧  z  ∈   L   2    }    {\displaystyle L_{1}\cdot L_{2}=\{wz\mid w\in L_{1}\land z\in L_{2}\}}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   Kleene star       L   1    ∗    =  {  ε  }  ∪  {  w  z  ∣  w  ∈   L   1    ∧  z  ∈   L   1    ∗    }    {\displaystyle L_{1}^{*}=\{\varepsilon \}\cup \{wz\mid w\in L_{1}\land z\in L_{1}^{*}\}}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   (String) homomorphism     h    {\displaystyle h}         h  (   L   1    )  =  {  h  (  w  )  ∣  w  ∈   L   1    }    {\displaystyle h(L_{1})=\{h(w)\mid w\in L_{1}\}}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  No  No  Yes   ε-free (string) homomorphism     h    {\displaystyle h}         h  (   L   1    )  =  {  h  (  w  )  ∣  w  ∈   L   1    }    {\displaystyle h(L_{1})=\{h(w)\mid w\in L_{1}\}}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   Substitution     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }         φ  (   L   1    )  =   ⋃    σ   1    ⋯   σ   n    ∈   L   1      φ  (   σ   1    )  ⋅  …  ⋅  φ  (   σ   n    )    {\displaystyle \varphi (L_{1})=\bigcup _{\sigma _{1}\cdots \sigma _{n}\in L_{1}}\varphi (\sigma _{1})\cdot \ldots \cdot \varphi (\sigma _{n})}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Yes   Inverse homomorphism      h   −  1      {\displaystyle h^{-1}}          h   −  1    (   L   1    )  =   ⋃   w  ∈   L   1       h   −  1    (  w  )    {\displaystyle h^{-1}(L_{1})=\bigcup _{w\in L_{1}}h^{-1}(w)}     Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   Reverse       L   R    =  {   w   R    ∣  w  ∈  L  }    {\displaystyle L^{R}=\{w^{R}\mid w\in L\}}     Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   Intersection with a regular language      R    {\displaystyle R}         L  ∩  R  =  {  w  ∣  w  ∈  L  ∧  w  ∈  R  }    {\displaystyle L\cap R=\{w\mid w\in L\land w\in R\}}     Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Applications   Programming languages   Main articles: Syntax (programming languages) and Compiler-compiler  A compiler usually has two distinct components.
A lexical analyzer , sometimes generated by a tool like lex , identifies the tokens of the programming language grammar, e.g.
identifiers or keywords , numeric and string literals, punctuation and operator symbols, which are themselves specified by a simpler formal language, usually by means of regular expressions .
At the most basic conceptual level, a parser , sometimes generated by a parser generator like yacc , attempts to decide if the source program is syntactically valid, that is if it is well formed with respect to the programming language grammar for which the compiler was built.
Of course, compilers do more than just parse the source code – they usually translate it into some executable format.
Because of this, a parser usually outputs more than a yes/no answer, typically an abstract syntax tree .
This is used by subsequent stages of the compiler to eventually generate an executable containing machine code that runs directly on the hardware, or some intermediate code that requires a virtual machine to execute.
Formal theories, systems, and proofs   Main articles: Theory (mathematical logic) and Formal system  This diagram shows the syntactic divisions within a formal system .
Strings of symbols may be broadly divided into nonsense and well-formed formulas .
The set of well-formed formulas is divided into theorems and non-theorems.
In mathematical logic , a formal theory is a set of sentences expressed in a formal language.
A formal system (also called a logical calculus , or a logical system ) consists of a formal language together with a deductive apparatus (also called a deductive system ).
The deductive apparatus may consist of a set of transformation rules , which may be interpreted as valid rules of inference, or a set of axioms , or have both.
Although a formal language can be identified with its formulas, a formal system cannot be likewise identified by its theorems.
Two formal systems       F  S      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {FS}}}   and       F   S  ′       {\displaystyle {\mathcal {FS'}}}   may have all the same theorems and yet differ in some significant proof-theoretic way (a formula A may be a syntactic consequence of a formula B in one but not another for instance).
A formal proof or derivation is a finite sequence of well-formed formulas (which may be interpreted as sentences, or propositions ) each of which is an axiom or follows from the preceding formulas in the sequence by a rule of inference .
The last sentence in the sequence is a theorem of a formal system.
Formal proofs are useful because their theorems can be interpreted as true propositions.
Interpretations and models   Main articles: Formal semantics (logic) , Interpretation (logic) , and Model theory  Formal languages are entirely syntactic in nature, but may be given semantics that give meaning to the elements of the language.
For instance, in mathematical logic , the set of possible formulas of a particular logic is a formal language, and an interpretation assigns a meaning to each of the formulas—usually, a truth value .
The study of interpretations of formal languages is called formal semantics .
In mathematical logic, this is often done in terms of model theory .
In model theory, the terms that occur in a formula are interpreted as objects within mathematical structures , and fixed compositional interpretation rules determine how the truth value of the formula can be derived from the interpretation of its terms; a model for a formula is an interpretation of terms such that the formula becomes true.
Syntactically correct logical formula  For broader coverage of this topic, see Mathematical formula .
Part of a series on Formal languages  Key concepts  Formal system  Alphabet  Syntax  Semantics (computer science)  Semantics (logic)  Formal grammar  Automata theory  Ground expression  Regular expression  Well-formed formula   Applications  Formal methods  Propositional calculus  Predicate logic  Mathematical notation  Natural language processing  Programming language theory  Computational linguistics  Syntax analysis  Formal verification  v t e  In mathematical logic , propositional logic and predicate logic , a well-formed formula , abbreviated WFF or wff , often simply formula , is a finite sequence of symbols from a given alphabet that is part of a formal language .
A formal language can be identified with the set of formulas in the language.
A formula is a syntactic object that can be given a semantic meaning by means of an interpretation .
Two key uses of formulas are in propositional logic and predicate logic.
Introduction   A key use of formulas is in propositional logic and predicate logic such as first-order logic .
In those contexts, a formula is a string of symbols φ for which it makes sense to ask "is φ true?
", once any free variables in φ have been instantiated.
In formal logic, proofs can be represented by sequences of formulas with certain properties, and the final formula in the sequence is what is proven.
Although the term "formula" may be used for written marks (for instance, on a piece of paper or chalkboard), it is more precisely understood as the sequence of symbols being expressed, with the marks being a token instance of formula.
This distinction between the vague notion of "property" and the inductively-defined notion of well-formed formula has roots in Weyl's 1910 paper "Uber die Definitionen der mathematischen Grundbegriffe".
Thus the same formula may be written more than once, and a formula might in principle be so long that it cannot be written at all within the physical universe.
Formulas themselves are syntactic objects.
They are given meanings by interpretations.
For example, in a propositional formula, each propositional variable may be interpreted as a concrete proposition, so that the overall formula expresses a relationship between these propositions.
A formula need not be interpreted, however, to be considered solely as a formula.
Propositional calculus   Main article: Propositional calculus  The formulas of propositional calculus , also called propositional formulas ,  are expressions such as     (  A  ∧  (  B  ∨  C  )  )    {\displaystyle (A\land (B\lor C))}   .
Their definition begins with the arbitrary choice of a set V of propositional variables .
The alphabet consists of the letters in V along with the symbols for the propositional connectives and parentheses "(" and ")", all of which are assumed to not be in V .
The formulas will be certain expressions (that is, strings of symbols) over this alphabet.
The formulas are inductively defined as follows:  Each propositional variable is, on its own, a formula.
If φ is a formula, then ¬φ is a formula.
If φ and ψ are formulas, and • is any binary connective, then ( φ • ψ) is a formula.
Here • could be (but is not limited to) the usual operators ∨, ∧, →, or ↔.
This definition can also be written as a formal grammar in Backus–Naur form , provided the set of variables is finite:  < alpha set >  ::= p | q | r | s | t | u | ...
(the arbitrary finite set of propositional variables) < form >  ::=  < alpha set > | ¬ < form > | ( < form > ∧ < form > ) | ( < form > ∨ < form > ) | ( < form > → < form > ) | ( < form > ↔ < form > )  Using this grammar, the sequence of symbols  ((( p → q ) ∧ ( r → s )) ∨ (¬ q ∧ ¬ s ))  is a formula, because it is grammatically correct.
The sequence of symbols  (( p → q )→( qq )) p ))  is not a formula, because it does not conform to the grammar.
A complex formula may be difficult to read, owing to, for example, the proliferation of parentheses.
To alleviate this last phenomenon, precedence rules (akin to the standard mathematical order of operations ) are assumed among the operators, making some operators more binding than others.
For example, assuming the precedence (from most binding to least binding) 1.
¬   2.
→  3.
∧  4.
∨.
Then the formula  ((( p → q ) ∧ ( r → s )) ∨ (¬ q ∧ ¬ s ))  may be abbreviated as  p → q ∧ r → s ∨ ¬ q ∧ ¬ s  This is, however, only a convention used to simplify the written representation of a formula.
If the precedence was assumed, for example, to be left-right associative, in following order: 1.
∧  3.
∨  4.
→, then the same formula above (without parentheses) would be rewritten as  ( p → ( q ∧ r )) → ( s ∨ (¬ q ∧ ¬ s ))  Predicate logic   The definition of a formula in first-order logic        Q  S      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {QS}}}   is relative to the signature of the theory at hand.
This signature specifies the constant symbols, predicate symbols, and function symbols of the theory at hand, along with the arities of the function and predicate symbols.
The definition of a formula comes in several parts.
First, the set of terms is defined recursively.
Terms, informally, are expressions that represent objects from the domain of discourse .
Any variable is a term.
Any constant symbol from the signature is a term  an expression of the form f ( t 1 ,..., t n ), where f is an n -ary function symbol, and t 1 ,..., t n are terms, is again a term.
The next step is to define the atomic formulas .
If t 1 and t 2 are terms then t 1 = t 2 is an atomic formula  If R is an n -ary predicate symbol, and t 1 ,..., t n are terms, then R ( t 1 ,..., t n ) is an atomic formula  Finally, the set of formulas is defined to be the smallest set containing the set of atomic formulas such that the following holds:      ¬  ϕ    {\displaystyle \neg \phi }   is a formula when     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   is a formula      (  ϕ  ∧  ψ  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \land \psi )}   and     (  ϕ  ∨  ψ  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \lor \psi )}   are formulas when     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   and     ψ    {\displaystyle \psi }   are formulas;      ∃  x   ϕ    {\displaystyle \exists x\,\phi }   is a formula when     x    {\displaystyle x}   is a variable and     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   is a formula;      ∀  x   ϕ    {\displaystyle \forall x\,\phi }   is a formula when     x    {\displaystyle x}   is a variable and     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   is a formula (alternatively,     ∀  x   ϕ    {\displaystyle \forall x\,\phi }   could be defined as an abbreviation for     ¬  ∃  x   ¬  ϕ    {\displaystyle \neg \exists x\,\neg \phi }   ).
If a formula has no occurrences of     ∃  x    {\displaystyle \exists x}   or     ∀  x    {\displaystyle \forall x}   , for any variable     x    {\displaystyle x}   , then it is called quantifier-free .
An existential formula is a formula starting with a sequence of existential quantification followed by a quantifier-free formula.
Atomic and open formulas   Main article: Atomic formula  An atomic formula is a formula that contains no logical connectives nor quantifiers , or equivalently a formula that has no strict subformulas.
The precise form of atomic formulas depends on the formal system under consideration; for propositional logic , for example, the atomic formulas are the propositional variables .
For predicate logic , the atoms are predicate symbols together with their arguments, each argument being a term .
According to some terminology, an open formula is formed by combining atomic formulas using only logical connectives, to the exclusion of quantifiers.
This is not to be confused with a formula which is not closed.
Closed formulas   Main article: Sentence (logic)  A closed formula , also ground formula or sentence , is a formula in which there are no free occurrences of any variable .
If A is a formula of a first-order language in which the variables v 1 , …, v n have free occurrences, then A preceded by ∀ v 1 ⋯ ∀ v n is a closure of A .
Properties applicable to formulas   A formula A in a language       Q      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {Q}}}   is valid if it is true for every interpretation of       Q      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {Q}}}   .
A formula A in a language       Q      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {Q}}}   is satisfiable if it is true for some interpretation of       Q      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {Q}}}   .
A formula A of the language of arithmetic is decidable if it represents a decidable set , i.e.
if there is an effective method which, given a substitution of the free variables of A , says that either the resulting instance of A is provable or its negation is.
Usage of the terminology   In earlier works on mathematical logic (e.g.
by Church  ), formulas referred to any strings of symbols and among these strings, well-formed formulas were the strings that followed the formation rules of (correct) formulas.
Several authors simply say formula.
Modern usages (especially in the context of computer science with mathematical software such as model checkers , automated theorem provers , interactive theorem provers ) tend to retain of the notion of formula only the algebraic concept and to leave the question of well-formedness , i.e.
of the concrete string representation of formulas (using this or that symbol for connectives and quantifiers, using this or that parenthesizing convention , using Polish or infix notation, etc.)
as a mere notational problem.
While the expression well-formed formula is still in use,    these authors do not necessarily  use it in contradistinction to the old sense of formula , which is no longer common in mathematical logic.
The expression "well-formed formulas" (WFF) also crept into popular culture.
WFF is part of an esoteric pun used in the name of the academic game " WFF 'N PROOF : The Game of Modern Logic", by Layman Allen,  developed while he was at Yale Law School (he was later a professor at the University of Michigan ).
The suite of games is designed to teach the principles of symbolic logic to children (in Polish notation ).
Its name is an echo of whiffenpoof , a nonsense word used as a cheer at Yale University made popular in The Whiffenpoof Song and The Whiffenpoofs .
Term in mathematical logic  The parallels axiom ( P ) is independent of the remaining geometry axioms ( R ): there are models (1) that satisfy R and P , but also models (2,3) that satisfy R , but not P .
In mathematical logic , independence is the unprovability of a sentence from other sentences.
A sentence σ is independent of a given first-order theory  T if T neither proves nor refutes σ; that is, it is impossible to prove σ from T , and it is also impossible to prove from T that σ is false.
Sometimes, σ is said (synonymously) to be undecidable from T ; this is not the same meaning of " decidability " as in a decision problem .
A theory T is independent if each axiom in T is not provable from the remaining axioms in T .
A theory for which there is an independent set of axioms is independently axiomatizable .
Usage note   Some authors say that σ is independent of T when T simply cannot prove σ, and do not necessarily assert by this that T cannot refute σ.
These authors will sometimes say "σ is independent of and consistent with T " to indicate that T can neither prove nor refute σ.
Independence results in set theory   Many interesting statements in set theory are independent of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF).
The following statements in set theory are known to be independent of ZF, under the assumption that ZF is consistent:  The axiom of choice  The continuum hypothesis and the generalized continuum hypothesis  The Suslin conjecture  The following statements (none of which have been proved false) cannot be proved in ZFC (the Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory plus the axiom of choice) to be independent of ZFC, under the added hypothesis that ZFC is consistent.
The existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals  The existence of large cardinals  The non-existence of Kurepa trees  The following statements are inconsistent with the axiom of choice, and therefore with ZFC.
However they are probably independent of ZF, in a corresponding sense to the above: They cannot be proved in ZF, and few working set theorists expect to find a refutation in ZF.
However ZF cannot prove that they are independent of ZF, even with the added hypothesis that ZF is consistent.
The axiom of determinacy  The axiom of real determinacy  AD+  Applications to physical theory   Since 2000, logical independence has become understood as having crucial significance in the foundations of physics.
Software tool to assist with the development of formal proofs by human-machine collaboration  For verification in computer science, see formal verification .
For the academic conference, see Interactive Theorem Proving (conference) .
Not to be confused with Interactive proof system .
This article is missing information about automated proof checking .
( February 2024 )  This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .
( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  An interactive proof session in CoqIDE, showing the proof script on the left and the proof state on the right  In computer science and mathematical logic , a proof assistant or interactive theorem prover is a software tool to assist with the development of formal proofs by human-machine collaboration.
This involves some sort of interactive proof editor, or other interface , with which a human can guide the search for proofs, the details of which are stored in, and some steps provided by, a computer .
A recent effort within this field is making these tools use artificial intelligence to automate the formalization of ordinary mathematics.
System comparison   See also: Dependent type § Comparison , and Automated theorem proving § Comparison   Name  Latest version  Developer(s)  Implementation language  Features   Higher-order logic  Dependent types  Small kernel  Proof automation  Proof by reflection  Code generation    ACL2  8.3  Matt Kaufmann and J Strother Moore  Common Lisp  No  Untyped  No  Yes  Yes   Already executable   Agda  2.6.3  Ulf Norell, Nils Anders Danielsson, and Andreas Abel ( Chalmers and Gothenburg )  Haskell  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Partial  Already executable   Albatross  0.4  Helmut Brandl  OCaml  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Un­known  Not yet Implemented   Coq  8.19.0  INRIA  OCaml  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   F*  repository  Microsoft Research and INRIA  F*  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  Yes   Yes   HOL Light  repository  John Harrison  OCaml  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  No  No   HOL4  Kananaskis-13 (or repo)  Michael Norrish, Konrad Slind, and others  Standard ML  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  No  Yes   Idris  2 0.6.0.
Edwin Brady  Idris  Yes  Yes  Yes  Un­known  Partial  Yes   Isabelle  Isabelle2021 (February 2021)  Larry Paulson ( Cambridge ), Tobias Nipkow ( München ) and Makarius Wenzel  Standard ML , Scala  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   Lean   v4.1.0 (official release) v4.2.0-rc1 (pre-release)    Leonardo de Moura ( Microsoft Research )  C++ , Lean  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes   LEGO (not affiliated with Lego )  1.3.1  Randy Pollack ( Edinburgh )  Standard ML  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  No  No   Metamath  v0.198   Norman Megill  ANSI C          Mizar  8.1.05  Białystok University  Free Pascal  Partial  Yes  No  No  No  No   Nqthm             NuPRL  5  Cornell University  Common Lisp  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Un­known  Yes   PVS  6.0  SRI International  Common Lisp  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  No  Un­known   Twelf  1.7.1  Frank Pfenning and Carsten Schürmann  Standard ML  Yes  Yes  Un­known  No  No  Un­known  ACL2 – a programming language, a first-order logical theory, and a theorem prover (with both interactive and automatic modes) in the Boyer–Moore tradition.
Coq – Allows the expression of mathematical assertions, mechanically checks proofs of these assertions, helps to find formal proofs, and extracts a certified program from the constructive proof of its formal specification.
HOL theorem provers – A family of tools ultimately derived from the LCF theorem prover .
In these systems the logical core is a library of their programming language.
Theorems represent new elements of the language and can only be introduced via "strategies" which guarantee logical correctness.
Strategy composition gives users the ability to produce significant proofs with relatively few interactions with the system.
Members of the family include: HOL4 – The "primary descendant", still under active development.
Support for both Moscow ML and Poly/ML .
Has a BSD-style license .
HOL Light – A thriving "minimalist fork".
OCaml based.
ProofPower – Went proprietary, then returned to open source.
Based on Standard ML .
IMPS, An Interactive Mathematical Proof System.
Isabelle is an interactive theorem prover, successor of HOL.
The main code-base is BSD-licensed, but the Isabelle distribution bundles many add-on tools with different licenses.
Jape – Java based.
Lean  LEGO  Matita – A light system based on the Calculus of Inductive Constructions.
MINLOG – A proof assistant based on first-order minimal logic.
Mizar – A proof assistant based on first-order logic, in a natural deduction style, and Tarski–Grothendieck set theory .
PhoX – A proof assistant based on higher-order logic which is eXtensible.
Prototype Verification System (PVS) – a proof language and system based on higher-order logic.
TPS and ETPS – Interactive theorem provers also based on simply-typed lambda calculus, but based on an independent formulation of the logical theory and independent implementation.
User interfaces   A popular front-end for proof assistants is the Emacs -based Proof General, developed at the University of Edinburgh .
Coq includes CoqIDE, which is based on OCaml/ Gtk .
Isabelle includes Isabelle/jEdit, which is based on jEdit and the Isabelle/ Scala infrastructure for document-oriented proof processing.
More recently, Visual Studio Code extensions have been developed for Isabelle by Makarius Wenzel,  and for Lean 4 by the leanprover developers.
Formalization extent   Freek Wiedijk has been keeping a ranking of proof assistants by the amount of formalized theorems out of a list of 100 well-known theorems.
As of September 2023, only five systems have formalized proofs of more than 70% of the theorems, namely Isabelle, HOL Light, Coq, Lean	and Metamath.
Notable formalized proofs   See also: Computer-assisted proof § Theorems proved with the help of computer programs  The following is a list of notable proofs that have been formalized within proof assistants.
Theorem  Proof assistant  Year   Four color theorem   Coq  2005   Feit–Thompson theorem   Coq  2012   Fundamental group of the circle   Coq  2013   Erdős–Graham problem     Lean  2022   Polynomial Freiman-Ruzsa conjecture over       F    2      {\displaystyle \mathbb {F} _{2}}     Lean  2023 Semantic distinction in philosophy  For the linguistic categories, see Analytic language and Synthetic language .
The analytic–synthetic distinction is a semantic distinction used primarily in philosophy to distinguish between propositions (in particular, statements that are affirmative subject – predicate judgments) that are of two types: analytic propositions and synthetic propositions .
Analytic propositions are true or not true solely by virtue of their meaning, whereas synthetic propositions' truth, if any, derives from how their meaning relates to the world.
While the distinction was first proposed by Immanuel Kant , it was revised considerably over time, and different philosophers have used the terms in very different ways.
Furthermore, some philosophers (starting with Willard Van Orman Quine ) have questioned whether there is even a clear distinction to be made between propositions which are analytically true and propositions which are synthetically true.
Debates regarding the nature and usefulness of the distinction continue to this day in contemporary philosophy of language .
Kant   Immanuel Kant  Conceptual containment   The philosopher Immanuel Kant uses the terms "analytic" and "synthetic" to divide propositions into two types.
Kant introduces the analytic–synthetic distinction in the Introduction to his Critique of Pure Reason (1781/1998, A6–7/B10–11).
There, he restricts his attention to statements that are affirmative subject–predicate judgments and defines "analytic proposition" and "synthetic proposition" as follows:  analytic proposition : a proposition whose predicate concept is contained in its subject concept  synthetic proposition : a proposition whose predicate concept is not contained in its subject concept but related  Examples of analytic propositions, on Kant's definition, include:  "All bachelors are unmarried."
"All triangles have three sides."
Kant's own example is:  "All bodies are extended": that is, they occupy space.
(A7/B11)  Each of these statements is an affirmative subject–predicate judgment, and, in each, the predicate concept is contained within the subject concept.
The concept "bachelor" contains the concept "unmarried"; the concept "unmarried" is part of the definition of the concept "bachelor".
Likewise, for "triangle" and "has three sides", and so on.
Examples of synthetic propositions, on Kant's definition, include:  "All bachelors are alone."
"All creatures with hearts have kidneys."
Kant's own example is:  "All bodies are heavy": that is, they experience a gravitational force.
(A7/B11)  As with the previous examples classified as analytic propositions, each of these new statements is an affirmative subject–predicate judgment.
However, in none of these cases does the subject concept contain the predicate concept.
The concept "bachelor" does not contain the concept "alone"; "alone" is not a part of the definition of "bachelor".
The same is true for "creatures with hearts" and "have kidneys"; even if every creature with a heart also has kidneys, the concept "creature with a heart" does not contain the concept "has kidneys".
So the philosophical issue is: What kind of statement is "Language is used to transmit meaning"?
Kant's version and the a priori – a posteriori distinction   Main article: A priori and a posteriori  In the Introduction to the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant contrasts his distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions with another distinction, the distinction between a priori and a posteriori propositions.
He defines these terms as follows:  a priori proposition : a proposition whose justification does not rely upon experience.
Moreover, the proposition can be validated by experience, but is not grounded in experience.
Therefore, it is logically necessary.
a posteriori proposition : a proposition whose justification does rely upon experience.
The proposition is validated by, and grounded in, experience.
Therefore, it is logically contingent.
Examples of a priori propositions include:  "All bachelors are unmarried."
"7 + 5 = 12."
The justification of these propositions does not depend upon experience: one need not consult experience to determine whether all bachelors are unmarried, nor whether 7 + 5 = 12 .
(Of course, as Kant would grant, experience is required to understand the concepts "bachelor", "unmarried", "7", "+" and so forth.
However, the a priori – a posteriori distinction as employed here by Kant refers not to the origins of the concepts but to the justification of the propositions.
Once we have the concepts, experience is no longer necessary.)
Examples of a posteriori propositions include:  "All bachelors are unhappy."
"Tables exist."
Both of these propositions are a posteriori : any justification of them would require one's experience.
The analytic–synthetic distinction and the a priori – a posteriori distinction together yield four types of propositions:  analytic a priori  synthetic a priori  analytic a posteriori  synthetic a posteriori  Kant posits the third type as obviously self-contradictory.
Ruling it out, he discusses only the remaining three types as components of his epistemological framework—each, for brevity's sake, becoming, respectively, "analytic", "synthetic a priori ", and "empirical" or " a posteriori " propositions.
This triad accounts for all propositions possible.
Examples of analytic and a posteriori statements have already been given, for synthetic a priori propositions he gives those in mathematics and physics.
The ease of knowing analytic propositions   Part of Kant's argument in the Introduction to the Critique of Pure Reason involves arguing that there is no problem figuring out how knowledge of analytic propositions is possible.
To know an analytic proposition, Kant argued, one need not consult experience.
Instead, one needs merely to take the subject and "extract from it, in accordance with the principle of contradiction, the required predicate" (A7/B12).
In analytic propositions, the predicate concept is contained in the subject concept.
Thus, to know an analytic proposition is true, one need merely examine the concept of the subject.
If one finds the predicate contained in the subject, the judgment is true.
Thus, for example, one need not consult experience to determine whether "All bachelors are unmarried" is true.
One need merely examine the subject concept ("bachelors") and see if the predicate concept "unmarried" is contained in it.
And in fact, it is: "unmarried" is part of the definition of "bachelor" and so is contained within it.
Thus the proposition "All bachelors are unmarried" can be known to be true without consulting experience.
It follows from this, Kant argued, first: All analytic propositions are a priori ; there are no a posteriori analytic propositions.
It follows, second: There is no problem understanding how we can know analytic propositions; we can know them because we only need to consult our concepts in order to determine that they are true.
The possibility of metaphysics   After ruling out the possibility of analytic a posteriori propositions, and explaining how we can obtain knowledge of analytic a priori propositions, Kant also explains how we can obtain knowledge of synthetic a posteriori propositions.
That leaves only the question of how knowledge of synthetic a priori propositions is possible.
This question is exceedingly important, Kant maintains, because all scientific knowledge (for him Newtonian physics and mathematics) is made up of synthetic a priori propositions.
If it is impossible to determine which synthetic a priori propositions are true, he argues, then metaphysics as a discipline is impossible.
The remainder of the Critique of Pure Reason is devoted to examining whether and how knowledge of synthetic a priori propositions is possible.
Logical positivists   Frege revision of Kantian definition   Over a hundred years later, a group of philosophers took interest in Kant and his distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions: the logical positivists .
Part of Kant's examination of the possibility of synthetic a priori knowledge involved the examination of mathematical propositions, such as  "7 + 5 = 12."
(B15–16)  "The shortest distance between two points is a straight line."
(B16–17)  Kant maintained that mathematical propositions such as these are synthetic a priori propositions, and that we know them.
That they are synthetic, he thought, is obvious: the concept "equal to 12" is not contained within the concept "7 + 5"; and the concept "straight line" is not contained within the concept "the shortest distance between two points".
From this, Kant concluded that we have knowledge of synthetic a priori propositions.
Gottlob Frege 's notion of analyticity included a number of logical properties and relations beyond containment: symmetry , transitivity , antonymy , or negation and so on.
He had a strong emphasis on formality, in particular formal definition, and also emphasized the idea of substitution of synonymous terms.
"All bachelors are unmarried" can be expanded out with the formal definition of bachelor as "unmarried man" to form "All unmarried men are unmarried", which is recognizable as tautologous and therefore analytic from its logical form: any statement of the form "All X that are ( F and G ) are F ".
Using this particular expanded idea of analyticity, Frege concluded that Kant's examples of arithmetical truths are analytical a priori truths and not synthetic a priori truths.
Thanks to Frege's logical semantics, particularly his concept of analyticity, arithmetic truths like "7+5=12" are no longer synthetic a priori but analytical a priori truths in Carnap 's extended sense of "analytic".
Hence logical empiricists are not subject to Kant's criticism of Hume for throwing out mathematics along with metaphysics.
(Here "logical empiricist" is a synonym for "logical positivist".)
The origin of the logical positivist's distinction   The logical positivists agreed with Kant that we have knowledge of mathematical truths, and further that mathematical propositions are a priori .
However, they did not believe that any complex metaphysics, such as the type Kant supplied, are necessary to explain our knowledge of mathematical truths.
Instead, the logical positivists maintained that our knowledge of judgments like "all bachelors are unmarried" and our knowledge of mathematics (and logic) are in the basic sense the same: all proceeded from our knowledge of the meanings of terms or the conventions of language.
Since empiricism had always asserted that all knowledge is based on experience, this assertion had to include knowledge in mathematics.
On the other hand, we believed that with respect to this problem the rationalists had been right in rejecting the old empiricist view that the truth of "2+2=4" is contingent on the observation of facts, a view that would lead to the unacceptable consequence that an arithmetical statement might possibly be refuted tomorrow by new experiences.
Our solution, based upon Wittgenstein 's conception, consisted in asserting the thesis of empiricism only for factual truth.
By contrast, the truths of logic and mathematics are not in need of confirmation by observations, because they do not state anything about the world of facts, they hold for any possible combination of facts.
— Rudolf Carnap, "Autobiography": §10: Semantics, p.
64  Logical positivist definitions   Thus the logical positivists drew a new distinction, and, inheriting the terms from Kant, named it the "analytic-synthetic distinction".
They provided many different definitions, such as the following:  analytic proposition : a proposition whose truth depends solely on the meaning of its terms  analytic proposition : a proposition that is true (or false) by definition  analytic proposition : a proposition that is made true (or false) solely by the conventions of language  (While the logical positivists believed that the only necessarily true propositions were analytic, they did not define "analytic proposition" as "necessarily true proposition" or "proposition that is true in all possible worlds".)
Synthetic propositions were then defined as:  synthetic proposition : a proposition that is not analytic  These definitions applied to all propositions, regardless of whether they were of subject–predicate form.
Thus, under these definitions, the proposition "It is raining or it is not raining" was classified as analytic, while for Kant it was analytic by virtue of its logical form.
And the proposition " 7 + 5 = 12 " was classified as analytic, while under Kant's definitions it was synthetic.
Two-dimensionalism   Two-dimensionalism is an approach to semantics in analytic philosophy .
It is a theory of how to determine the sense and reference of a word and the truth-value of a sentence .
It is intended to resolve a puzzle that has plagued philosophy for some time, namely: How is it possible to discover empirically that a necessary truth is true ?
Two-dimensionalism provides an analysis of the semantics of words and sentences that makes sense of this possibility.
The theory was first developed by Robert Stalnaker , but it has been advocated by numerous philosophers since, including David Chalmers and Berit Brogaard .
Any given sentence, for example, the words,  "Water is H 2 O"  is taken to express two distinct propositions , often referred to as a primary intension and a secondary intension , which together compose its meaning .
The primary intension of a word or sentence is its sense , i.e., is the idea or method by which we find its referent.
The primary intension of "water" might be a description, such as watery stuff .
The thing picked out by the primary intension of "water" could have been otherwise.
For example, on some other world where the inhabitants take "water" to mean watery stuff , but, where the chemical make-up of watery stuff is not H 2 O, it is not the case that water is H 2 O for that world.
The secondary intension of "water" is whatever thing "water" happens to pick out in this world, whatever that world happens to be.
So if we assign "water" the primary intension watery stuff then the secondary intension of "water" is H 2 O, since H 2 O is watery stuff in this world.
The secondary intension of "water" in our world is H 2 O, which is H 2 O in every world because unlike watery stuff it is impossible for H 2 O to be other than H 2 O.
When considered according to its secondary intension, "Water is H 2 O" is true in every world.
If two-dimensionalism is workable it solves some very important problems in the philosophy of language.
Saul Kripke has argued that "Water is H 2 O" is an example of the necessary a posteriori , since we had to discover that water was H 2 O, but given that it is true, it cannot be false.
It would be absurd to claim that something that is water is not H 2 O, for these are known to be identical .
Carnap's distinction   Rudolf Carnap was a strong proponent of the distinction between what he called "internal questions", questions entertained within a "framework" (like a mathematical theory), and "external questions", questions posed outside any framework – posed before the adoption of any framework.
The "internal" questions could be of two types: logical (or analytic, or logically true) and factual (empirical, that is, matters of observation interpreted using terms from a framework).
The "external" questions were also of two types: those that were confused pseudo-questions ("one disguised in the form of a theoretical question") and those that could be re-interpreted as practical, pragmatic questions about whether a framework under consideration was "more or less expedient, fruitful, conducive to the aim for which the language is intended".
The adjective "synthetic" was not used by Carnap in his 1950 work Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology .
Carnap did define a "synthetic truth" in his work Meaning and Necessity : a sentence that is true, but not simply because "the semantical rules of the system suffice for establishing its truth".
The notion of a synthetic truth is of something that is true both because of what it means and because of the way the world is, whereas analytic truths are true in virtue of meaning alone.
Thus, what Carnap calls internal factual statements (as opposed to internal logical statements) could be taken as being also synthetic truths because they require observations , but some external statements also could be "synthetic" statements and Carnap would be doubtful about their status.
The analytic–synthetic argument therefore is not identical with the internal–external distinction .
Quine's criticisms   See also: Willard Van Orman Quine § Rejection of the analytic–synthetic distinction , and Two Dogmas of Empiricism § Analyticity and circularity  In 1951, Willard Van Orman Quine published the essay " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " in which he argued that the analytic–synthetic distinction is untenable.
The argument at bottom is that there are no "analytic" truths, but all truths involve an empirical aspect.
In the first paragraph, Quine takes the distinction to be the following:  analytic propositions – propositions grounded in meanings, independent of matters of fact.
synthetic propositions – propositions grounded in fact.
Quine's position denying the analytic–synthetic distinction is summarized as follows:  It is obvious that truth in general depends on both language and extralinguistic fact.
...
Thus one is tempted to suppose in general that the truth of a statement is somehow analyzable into a linguistic component and a factual component.
Given this supposition, it next seems reasonable that in some statements the factual component should be null; and these are the analytic statements.
But, for all its a priori reasonableness, a boundary between analytic and synthetic statements simply has not been drawn.
That there is such a distinction to be drawn at all is an unempirical dogma of empiricists, a metaphysical article of faith.
— Willard V.
O.
Quine, "Two Dogmas of Empiricism", p.
64  To summarize Quine's argument, the notion of an analytic proposition requires a notion of synonymy, but establishing synonymy inevitably leads to matters of fact – synthetic propositions.
Thus, there is no non-circular (and so no tenable) way to ground the notion of analytic propositions.
While Quine's rejection of the analytic–synthetic distinction is widely known, the precise argument for the rejection and its status is highly debated in contemporary philosophy.
However, some (for example, Paul Boghossian )  argue that Quine's rejection of the distinction is still widely accepted among philosophers, even if for poor reasons.
Responses   Paul Grice and P.
F.
Strawson criticized "Two Dogmas" in their 1956 article "In Defense of a Dogma".
Among other things, they argue that Quine's skepticism about synonyms leads to a skepticism about meaning.
If statements can have meanings, then it would make sense to ask "What does it mean?".
If it makes sense to ask "What does it mean?
", then synonymy can be defined as follows: Two sentences are synonymous if and only if the true answer of the question "What does it mean?"
asked of one of them is the true answer to the same question asked of the other.
They also draw the conclusion that discussion about correct or incorrect translations would be impossible given Quine's argument.
Four years after Grice and Strawson published their paper, Quine's book Word and Object was released.
In the book Quine presented his theory of indeterminacy of translation .
In Speech Acts , John Searle argues that from the difficulties encountered in trying to explicate analyticity by appeal to specific criteria, it does not follow that the notion itself is void.
Considering the way which we would test any proposed list of criteria, which is by comparing their extension to the set of analytic statements, it would follow that any explication of what analyticity means presupposes that we already have at our disposal a working notion of analyticity.
In "'Two Dogmas' Revisited", Hilary Putnam argues that Quine is attacking two different notions:    It seems to me there is as gross a distinction between 'All bachelors are unmarried' and 'There is a book on this table' as between any two things in this world, or at any rate, between any two linguistic expressions in the world;  — Hilary Putnam, Philosophical Papers , p.
36  Analytic truth defined as a true statement derivable from a tautology by putting synonyms for synonyms is near Kant's account of analytic truth as a truth whose negation is a contradiction.
Analytic truth defined as a truth confirmed no matter what, however, is closer to one of the traditional accounts of a priori .
While the first four sections of Quine's paper concern analyticity, the last two concern a priority.
Putnam considers the argument in the two last sections as independent of the first four, and at the same time as Putnam criticizes Quine, he also emphasizes his historical importance as the first top rank philosopher to both reject the notion of a priority and sketch a methodology without it.
Jerrold Katz , a one-time associate of Noam Chomsky , countered the arguments of "Two Dogmas" directly by trying to define analyticity non-circularly on the syntactical features of sentences.
Chomsky himself critically discussed Quine's conclusion, arguing that it is possible to identify some analytic truths (truths of meaning, not truths of facts) which are determined by specific relations holding among some innate conceptual features of the mind or brain.
In Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century, Volume 1: The Dawn of Analysis , Scott Soames pointed out that Quine's circularity argument needs two of the logical positivists' central theses to be effective:    All necessary (and all a priori ) truths are analytic.
Analyticity is needed to explain and legitimate necessity.
It is only when these two theses are accepted that Quine's argument holds.
It is not a problem that the notion of necessity is presupposed by the notion of analyticity if necessity can be explained without analyticity.
According to Soames, both theses were accepted by most philosophers when Quine published "Two Dogmas".
Today, however, Soames holds both statements to be antiquated.
He says: "Very few philosophers today would accept either , both of which now seem decidedly antique."
In other fields   This distinction was imported from philosophy into theology, with Albrecht Ritschl attempting to demonstrate that Kant's epistemology was compatible with Lutheranism.
Semantic distinction in philosophy  For the linguistic categories, see Analytic language and Synthetic language .
German philosopher (1724–1804)  "Kant" redirects here.
For other uses, see Kant (disambiguation) .
Immanuel Kant Portrait, 1768 Born ( 1724-04-22 ) 22 April 1724 Königsberg , Kingdom of Prussia (present-day Kaliningrad , Russia) Died 12 February 1804 (1804-02-12) (aged 79) Königsberg, East Prussia , Kingdom of Prussia Education  University of Königsberg ( BA ; MA , 1755; PhD , 1755; PhD , 1770)  Era Age of Enlightenment Region Western philosophy School  Enlightenment philosophy  Kantianism    Other schools   Classical liberalism   Empirical realism   German idealism   Liberal naturalism   Transcendental idealism   Institutions University of Königsberg Theses  New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition (September 1755)  On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible Worlds (August 1770)  Academic advisors Martin Knutzen , Johann Gottfried Teske (M.A.
advisor), Konrad Gottlieb Marquardt Notable students Jakob Sigismund Beck , Johann Gottfried Herder , Karl Leonhard Reinhold (epistolary correspondent) Main interests Aesthetics , epistemology , ethics , metaphysics , systematic philosophy Notable ideas     Aesthetic – teleological judgments   Analytic–synthetic distinction   Categorical and hypothetical imperative   Categories   Critical philosophy   Copernican revolution in philosophy  Disinterested delight   Empirical realism   Kant's antinomies   Kantian ethics   Kingdom of Ends   Nebular hypothesis   Transcendental schema   Theoretical vs.
practical philosophy   Transcendental idealism   Transcendental subject   Understanding–reason distinction    Signature  Part of a series on Immanuel Kant  Major works  Critique of Pure Reason  Prolegomena to ​ Any Future Metaphysics  " Answering the ​ Question: What Is Enlightenment?
"
Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals  Critique of Practical Reason  Critique of Judgment  Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason  Perpetual Peace  The Metaphysics of Morals  " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from ​ Benevolent Motives "  Opus Postumum   Kantianism • Kantian ethics  Transcendental idealism  Critical philosophy  Sapere aude  Thing-in-itself  Schema  A priori and a posteriori  Analytic–synthetic distinction  Noumenon  Category  Categorical imperative  Hypothetical imperative  " Kingdom of Ends "  Political philosophy   People  J.
G.
Fichte  G.
W.
F.
Hegel  David Hume  F.
H.
Jacobi  Arthur Schopenhauer  Baruch Spinoza   Related topics  German idealism  Neo-Kantianism   Category •  Philosophy portal  Immanuel Kant  (22 April 1724 – 12 February 1804) was a German philosopher and one of the central Enlightenment thinkers.
Born in Königsberg , Kant's comprehensive and systematic works in epistemology , metaphysics , ethics , and aesthetics have made him one of the most influential and controversial figures in modern Western philosophy , being called the "father of modern ethics", "father of modern aesthetics" and, by bringing together rationalism and empiricism, the "father of modern philosophy".
In his doctrine of transcendental idealism , Kant argued that space and time are mere "forms of intuition" that structure all experience and that the objects of experience are mere "appearances".
The nature of things as they are in themselves is unknowable to us.
In an attempt to counter the philosophical doctrine of skepticism , he wrote the Critique of Pure Reason (1781/1787), his best-known work.
Kant drew a parallel to the Copernican revolution in his proposal to think of the objects of experience as conforming to our spatial and temporal forms of intuition and the categories of our understanding, so that we have a priori cognition of those objects.
These claims have proved especially influential in the social sciences, particularly sociology and anthropology, which regard human activities as pre-oriented by cultural norms.
Kant believed that reason is the source of morality , and that aesthetics arises from a faculty of disinterested judgment.
Kant's religious views were deeply connected to his moral theory.
Their exact nature, however, remains in dispute.
He hoped that perpetual peace could be secured through an international federation of republican states and international cooperation .
His cosmopolitan reputation, however, is called into question by his promulgation of scientific racism for much of his career, although he altered his views on the subject in the last decade of his life.
Biography  Immanuel Kant was born on 22 April 1724 into a Prussian German family of Lutheran faith in Königsberg , East Prussia (since 1946 the Russian city of Kaliningrad ).
His mother, Anna Regina Reuter (1697–1737), was born in Königsberg to a father from Nuremberg .
Her surname is sometimes erroneously given as Porter.
Kant's father, Johann Georg Kant (1682–1746), was a German harness-maker from Memel , at the time Prussia's most northeastern city (now Klaipėda , Lithuania ).
It is possible that the Kants got their name from the village of Kantvainiai (German: Kantwaggen – today part of Priekulė ) and were of Kursenieki origin.
Emanuel was baptized and later changed the spelling of his name to Immanuel after learning Hebrew .
He was the fourth of nine children (six of whom reached adulthood).
The Kant household stressed the pietist values of religious devotion, humility, and a literal interpretation of the Bible .
The young Immanuel's education was strict, punitive and disciplinary, and focused on Latin and religious instruction over mathematics and science.
In his later years, Kant lived a strictly ordered life.
It was said that neighbors would set their clocks by his daily walks.
He never married but seems to have had a rewarding social life; he was a popular teacher as well as a modestly successful author, even before starting on his major philosophical works.
Young scholar  Kant showed a great aptitude for study at an early age.
He first attended the Collegium Fridericianum , from which he graduated at the end of the summer of 1740.
In 1740, aged 16, he enrolled at the University of Königsberg , where he would later remain for the rest of his professional life.
He studied the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and Christian Wolff under Martin Knutzen (Associate Professor of Logic and Metaphysics from 1734 until he died in 1751), a rationalist who was also familiar with developments in British philosophy and science and introduced Kant to the new mathematical physics of Isaac Newton .
Knutzen dissuaded Kant from the theory of pre-established harmony , which he regarded as "the pillow for the lazy mind".
He also dissuaded Kant from idealism , the idea that reality is purely mental, which most philosophers in the 18th century regarded negatively.
The theory of transcendental idealism that Kant later included in the Critique of Pure Reason was developed partially in opposition to traditional idealism.
Kant had contacts with students, colleagues, friends and diners who frequented the local Masonic lodge .
His father's stroke and subsequent death in 1746 interrupted his studies.
Kant left Königsberg shortly after August 1748;  he would return there in August 1754.
He became a private tutor in the towns surrounding Königsberg, but continued his scholarly research.
In 1749, he published his first philosophical work, Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces (written in 1745–1747).
Early work  Kant is best known for his work in the philosophy of ethics and metaphysics, but he made significant contributions to other disciplines.
In 1754, while contemplating on a prize question by the Berlin Academy about the problem of Earth's rotation, he argued that the Moon's gravity would slow down Earth's spin and he also put forth the argument that gravity would eventually cause the Moon's tidal locking to coincide with the Earth's rotation.
The next year, he expanded this reasoning to the formation and evolution of the Solar System in his Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens .
In 1755, Kant received a license to lecture in the University of Königsberg and began lecturing on a variety of topics including mathematics, physics, logic, and metaphysics.
In his 1756 essay on the theory of winds, Kant laid out an original insight into the Coriolis force .
In 1756, Kant also published three papers on the 1755 Lisbon earthquake .
Kant's theory, which involved shifts in huge caverns filled with hot gases, though inaccurate, was one of the first systematic attempts to explain earthquakes in natural rather than supernatural terms.
In 1757, Kant began lecturing on geography making him one of the first lecturers to explicitly teach geography as its own subject.
Geography was one of Kant's most popular lecturing topics and, in 1802, a compilation by Friedrich Theodor Rink of Kant's lecturing notes, Physical Geography , was released.
After Kant became a professor in 1770, he expanded the topics of his lectures to include lectures on natural law, ethics, and anthropology, along with other topics.
Kant's house in Königsberg in an 1842 painting In the Universal Natural History , Kant laid out the nebular hypothesis , in which he deduced that the Solar System had formed from a large cloud of gas, a nebula .
Kant also correctly deduced that the Milky Way was a large disk of stars , which he theorized formed from a much larger spinning gas cloud.
He further suggested that other distant "nebulae" might be other galaxies.
These postulations opened new horizons for astronomy, for the first time extending it beyond the solar system to galactic and intergalactic realms.
From then on, Kant turned increasingly to philosophical issues, although he continued to write on the sciences throughout his life.
In the early 1760s, Kant produced a series of important works in philosophy.
The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures , a work in logic, was published in 1762.
Two more works appeared the following year: Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy and The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God .
By 1764, Kant had become a notable popular author, and wrote Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime ; he was second to Moses Mendelssohn in a Berlin Academy prize competition with his Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (often referred to as "The Prize Essay").
In 1766 Kant wrote a critical piece on Emanuel Swedenborg 's Dreams of a Spirit-Seer .
In 1770, Kant was appointed Full Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Königsberg.
In defense of this appointment, Kant wrote his inaugural dissertation  On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World  This work saw the emergence of several central themes of his mature work, including the distinction between the faculties of intellectual thought and sensible receptivity.
To miss this distinction would mean to commit the error of subreption , and, as he says in the last chapter of the dissertation, only in avoiding this error does metaphysics flourish.
It is often claimed that Kant was a late developer, that he only became an important philosopher in his mid-50's after rejecting his earlier views.
While it is true that Kant wrote his greatest works relatively late in life, there is a tendency to underestimate the value of his earlier works.
Recent Kant scholarship has devoted more attention to these "pre-critical" writings and has recognized a degree of continuity with his mature work.
Publication of The Critique of Pure Reason  Main article: Critique of Pure Reason At age 46, Kant was an established scholar and an increasingly influential philosopher, and much was expected of him.
In correspondence with his ex-student and friend Markus Herz , Kant admitted that, in the inaugural dissertation, he had failed to account for the relation between our sensible and intellectual faculties.
He needed to explain how we combine what is known as sensory knowledge with the other type of knowledge—that is, reasoned knowledge—these two being related but having very different processes.
Portrait of philosopher David Hume Kant also credited David Hume with awakening him from a "dogmatic slumber" in which he had unquestioningly accepted the tenets of both religion and natural philosophy .
Hume, in his 1739 Treatise on Human Nature , had argued that we only know the mind through a subjective, essentially illusory series of perceptions.
Ideas such as causality , morality , and objects are not evident in experience, so their reality may be questioned.
Kant felt that reason could remove this skepticism, and he set himself to solving these problems.
Although fond of company and conversation with others, Kant isolated himself, and resisted friends' attempts to bring him out of his isolation.
When Kant emerged from his silence in 1781, the result was the Critique of Pure Reason .
Kant countered Hume's empiricism by claiming that some knowledge exists inherently in the mind, independent of experience.
He drew a parallel to the Copernican revolution in his proposal that worldly objects can be intuited a priori , and that intuition is consequently distinct from objective reality .
He acquiesced to Hume somewhat by defining causality as a "regular, constant sequence of events in time, and nothing more".
Although now recognized as one of the greatest works in the history of philosophy, the Critique disappointed Kant's readers upon its initial publication.
The book was long, over 800 pages in the original German edition, and written in a convoluted style.
Kant was quite upset with its reception.
His former student, Johann Gottfried Herder criticized it for placing reason as an entity worthy of criticism instead of considering the process of reasoning within the context of language and one's entire personality.
Similar to Christian Garve and Johann Georg Heinrich Feder , he rejected Kant's position that space and time possessed a form that could be analyzed.
Additionally, Garve and Feder also faulted Kant's Critique for not explaining differences in perception of sensations.
Its density made it, as Herder said in a letter to Johann Georg Hamann , a "tough nut to crack", obscured by "all this heavy gossamer".
Its reception stood in stark contrast to the praise Kant had received for earlier works, such as his Prize Essay and shorter works that preceded the first Critique .
Recognizing the need to clarify the original treatise, Kant wrote the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics in 1783 as a summary of its main views.
Shortly thereafter, Kant's friend Johann Friedrich Schultz (1739–1805), a professor of mathematics, published Explanations of Professor Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (Königsberg, 1784), which was a brief but very accurate commentary on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason .
Engraving of Immanuel Kant Kant's reputation gradually rose through the latter portion of the 1780s, sparked by a series of important works: the 1784 essay, " Answer to the Question: What is Enlightenment?
"; 1785's Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (his first work on moral philosophy); and, from 1786, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science .
But Kant's fame ultimately arrived from an unexpected source.
In 1786, Karl Leonhard Reinhold published a series of public letters on Kantian philosophy.
In these letters, Reinhold framed Kant's philosophy as a response to the central intellectual controversy of the era: the pantheism controversy .
Friedrich Jacobi had accused the recently deceased Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (a distinguished dramatist and philosophical essayist) of Spinozism .
Such a charge, tantamount to an accusation of atheism, was vigorously denied by Lessing's friend Moses Mendelssohn , leading to a bitter public dispute among partisans.
The controversy gradually escalated into a debate about the values of the Enlightenment and the value of reason.
Reinhold maintained in his letters that Kant's Critique of Pure Reason could settle this dispute by defending the authority and bounds of reason.
Reinhold's letters were widely read and made Kant the most famous philosopher of his era.
Later work  Kant published a second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason in 1787, heavily revising the first parts of the book.
Most of his subsequent work focused on other areas of philosophy.
He continued to develop his moral philosophy, notably in 1788's Critique of Practical Reason (known as the second Critique ), and 1797's Metaphysics of Morals .
The 1790 Critique of the Power of Judgment (the third Critique ) applied the Kantian system to aesthetics and teleology .
In 1792, Kant's attempt to publish the Second of the four Pieces of Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason ,  in the journal Berlinische Monatsschrift , met with opposition from the King's censorship commission, which had been established that same year in the context of the French Revolution .
Kant then arranged to have all four pieces published as a book, routing it through the philosophy department at the University of Jena to avoid the need for theological censorship.
This insubordination earned him a now-famous reprimand from the King.
When he nevertheless published a second edition in 1794, the censor was so irate that he arranged for a royal order that required Kant never to publish or even speak publicly about religion.
Kant then published his response to the King's reprimand and explained himself in the preface of The Conflict of the Faculties .
Kant with friends, including Christian Jakob Kraus , Johann Georg Hamann , Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel and Karl Gottfried Hagen He also wrote a number of semi-popular essays on history, religion, politics, and other topics.
These works were well received by Kant's contemporaries and confirmed his preeminent status in eighteenth-century philosophy.
There were several journals devoted solely to defending and criticizing Kantian philosophy.
Despite his success, philosophical trends were moving in another direction.
Many of Kant's most important disciples and followers (including Reinhold , Beck , and Fichte ) transformed the Kantian position.
The progressive stages of revision of Kant's teachings marked the emergence of German idealism .
Kant opposed these developments and publicly denounced Fichte in an open letter in 1799.
It was one of his final acts expounding a stance on philosophical questions.
In 1800, a student of Kant named Gottlob Benjamin Jäsche (1762–1842) published a manual of logic for teachers called Logik , which he had prepared at Kant's request.
Jäsche prepared the Logik using a copy of a textbook in logic by Georg Friedrich Meier entitled Excerpt from the Doctrine of Reason , in which Kant had written copious notes and annotations.
The Logik has been considered of fundamental importance to Kant's philosophy, and the understanding of it.
The great 19th-century logician Charles Sanders Peirce remarked, in an incomplete review of Thomas Kingsmill Abbott 's English translation of the introduction to Logik , that "Kant's whole philosophy turns upon his logic."
Also, Robert Schirokauer Hartman and Wolfgang Schwarz wrote in the translators' introduction to their English translation of the Logik , "Its importance lies not only in its significance for the Critique of Pure Reason , the second part of which is a restatement of fundamental tenets of the Logic , but in its position within the whole of Kant's work."
Death and burial  Kant's health, long poor, worsened.
He died at Königsberg on 12 February 1804, uttering " Es ist gut " (It is good) before expiring.
His unfinished final work was published as Opus Postumum .
Kant always cut a curious figure in his lifetime for his modest, rigorously scheduled habits, which have been referred to as clocklike.
However, Heinrich Heine noted the magnitude of "his destructive, world-crushing thoughts" and considered him a sort of philosophical "executioner", comparing him to Robespierre with the observation that both men "represented in the highest the type of provincial bourgeois.
Nature had destined them to weigh coffee and sugar, but Fate determined that they should weigh other things and placed on the scales of the one a king, on the scales of the other a god."
When his body was transferred to a new burial spot, his skull was measured during the exhumation and found to be larger than the average German male's with a "high and broad" forehead.
His forehead has been an object of interest ever since it became well known through his portraits: "In Döbler's portrait and in Kiefer's faithful if expressionistic reproduction of it—as well as in many of the other late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century portraits of Kant—the forehead is remarkably large and decidedly retreating."
Kant's tomb in Kaliningrad , Russia Kant's mausoleum adjoins the northeast corner of Königsberg Cathedral in Kaliningrad , Russia.
The mausoleum was constructed by the architect Friedrich Lahrs and was finished in 1924, in time for the bicentenary of Kant's birth.
Originally, Kant was buried inside the cathedral, but in 1880 his remains were moved to a neo-Gothic chapel adjoining the northeast corner of the cathedral.
Over the years, the chapel became dilapidated and was demolished to make way for the mausoleum, which was built on the same location.
The tomb and its mausoleum are among the few artifacts of German times preserved by the Soviets after they captured the city.
Today, many newlyweds bring flowers to the mausoleum.
Artifacts previously owned by Kant, known as Kantiana , were included in the Königsberg City Museum .
However, the museum was destroyed during World War II .
A replica of the statue of Kant that in German times stood in front of the main University of Königsberg building was donated by a German entity in the early 1990s and placed in the same grounds.
After the expulsion of Königsberg 's German population at the end of World War II , the University of Königsberg where Kant taught was replaced by the Russian-language Kaliningrad State University, which appropriated the campus and surviving buildings.
In 2005, the university was renamed Immanuel Kant State University of Russia .
The name change was announced at a ceremony attended by President Vladimir Putin of Russia and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany, and the university formed a Kant Society, dedicated to the study of Kantianism .
The university was again renamed in the 2010s, to Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University .
Philosophy  Bust of Immanuel Kant by Emanuel Bardou , 1798 Like many of his contemporaries, Kant was greatly impressed with the scientific advances made by Newton and others.
This new evidence of the power of human reason, however, called into question for many the traditional authority of politics and religion.
In particular, the modern mechanistic view of the world called into question the very possibility of morality; for, if there is no agency, there cannot be any responsibility.
The aim of Kant's critical project is to secure human autonomy, the basis of religion and morality, from this threat of mechanism—and to do so in a way that preserves the advances of modern science.
In the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant summarizes his philosophical concerns in the following three questions: What can I know?
What should I do?
What may I hope?
The Critique of Pure Reason focuses upon the first question and opens a conceptual space for an answer to the second question.
It argues that even though we cannot, strictly know that we are free, we can—and for practical purposes, must— think of ourselves as free.
In Kant's own words, "I had to deny knowledge in order to make room for faith ."
Our rational faith in morality is further developed in The Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals and The Critique of Practical Reason .
The Critique of the Power of Judgment argues we may rationally hope for the harmonious unity of the theoretical and practical domains treated in the first two Critiques on the basis, not only of its conceptual possibility, but also on the basis of our affective experience of natural beauty and, more generally, the organization of the natural world.
In Religion within the Bounds of Mere Reason , Kant endeavors to complete his answer to this third question.
These works all place the active, rational human subject at the center of the cognitive and moral worlds.
In brief, Kant argues that the mind itself necessarily makes a constitutive contribution to knowledge , that this contribution is transcendental rather than psychological, and that to act autonomously is to act according to rational moral principles.
Kant's critical project  See also: Critique of Pure Reason Immanuel Kant by Carle Vernet (1758–1836) Kant's 1781 (revised 1787) book the Critique of Pure Reason has often been cited as the most significant volume of metaphysics and epistemology in modern philosophy.
In the first Critique , and later on in other works as well, Kant frames the "general" and "real problem of pure reason" in terms of the following question: " How are synthetic judgments a priori possible ?"
To parse this claim, it is necessary to define some terms.
First, Kant makes a distinction in terms of the source of the content of knowledge: Cognitions a priori : "cognition independent of all experience and even of all the impressions of the senses".
Cognitions a posteriori : cognitions that have their sources in experience—that is, which are empirical .
Second, he makes a distinction in terms of the form of knowledge: Analytic proposition : a proposition whose predicate concept is contained in its subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are unmarried", or "All bodies take up space".
These can also be called " judgments of clarification ".
Synthetic proposition : a proposition whose predicate concept is not contained in its subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are alone", "All swans are white," or "All bodies have weight".
These can also be called " judgments of amplification ".
An analytic proposition is true by nature of strictly conceptual relations.
All analytic propositions are a priori (it is analytically true that no analytic proposition could be a posteriori ).
By contrast, a synthetic proposition is one the content of which includes something new.
The truth or falsehood of a synthetic statement depends upon something more than what is contained in its concepts.
The most obvious form of synthetic proposition is a simple empirical observation.
Philosophers such as David Hume believed that these were the only possible kinds of human reason and investigation, which he called "relations of ideas" and "matters of fact".
Establishing the synthetic a priori as a third mode of knowledge would allow Kant to push back against Hume's skepticism about such matters as causation and metaphysical knowledge more generally.
This is because, unlike a posteriori cognition, a priori cognition has "true or strict...
universality " and includes a claim of " necessity ".
Kant himself regards it as uncontroversial that we do have synthetic a priori knowledge—most obviously, that of mathematics.
That 7 + 5 = 12, he claims, is a result not contained in the concepts of seven, five, and the addition operation.
Yet, although he considers the possibility of such knowledge to be obvious, Kant nevertheless assumes the burden of providing a philosophical proof that we have a priori knowledge in mathematics, the natural sciences, and metaphysics.
It is the twofold aim of the Critique both to prove and to explain the possibility of this knowledge.
"There are", Kant says, "two stems of human cognition, which may perhaps arise from a common but to us unknown root, namely sensibility and understanding , through the first of which objects are given to us, but through the second of which they are thought ."
Kant's term for the object of sensibility is intuition , and his term for the object of the understanding is concept .
In general terms, the former is a non-discursive representation of a particular object, and the latter is a discursive (or mediate) representation of a general type of object.
The conditions of possible experience require both intuitions and concepts, that is, the affection of the receptive sensibility and the actively synthesizing power of the understanding.
Thus the statement: "Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind."
Kant's basic strategy in the first half of his book will be to argue that some intuitions and concepts are pure —that is, are contributed entirely by the mind, independent of anything empirical.
Knowledge generated on this basis, under certain conditions, can be synthetic a priori .
This insight is known as Kant's "Copernican revolution", because, just as Copernicus advanced astronomy by way of a radical shift in perspective, so Kant here claims do the same for metaphysics.
The second half of the Critique is the explicitly critical part.
In this "transcendental dialectic", Kant argues that many of the claims of traditional rationalist metaphysics violate the criteria he claims to establish in the first, "constructive" part of his book.
As Kant observes, "human reason, without being moved by the mere vanity of knowing it all, inexorably pushes on, driven by its own need to such questions that cannot be answered by any experiential use of reason".
It is the project of "the critique of pure reason" to establish the limits as to just how far reason may legitimately so proceed.
The doctrine of transcendental idealism  See also: Transcendental idealism The section of the Critique entitled "The transcendental aesthetic" introduces Kant's famous metaphysics of transcendental idealism .
Something is "transcendental" if it is a necessary condition for the possibility of experience, and "idealism" denotes some form of mind-dependence that must be further specified.
(The correct interpretation of Kant's own specification remains controversial.)
The metaphysical thesis, then, states that human beings only experience and know phenomenal appearances, not independent things-in-themselves, because space and time are nothing but the subjective forms of intuition that we ourselves contribute to experience.
Nevertheless, although Kant says that space and time are "transcendentally ideal"—the pure forms of human sensibility, rather than part of nature or reality as it exists in-itself—he also claims that they are "empirically real", by which he means "that 'everything that can come before us externally as an object' is in both space and time, and that our internal intuitions of ourselves are in time".
However we may interpret Kant's doctrine, he clearly wishes to distinguish his position from the subjective idealism of Berkeley .
Paul Guyer , although critical of many of Kant's arguments in this section, nevertheless writes of the "Transcendental Aesthetic" that it "not only lays the first stone in Kant's constructive theory of knowledge; it also lays the foundation for both his critique and his reconstruction of traditional metaphysics.
It argues that all genuine knowledge requires a sensory component, and thus that metaphysical claims that transcend the possibility of sensory confirmation can never amount to knowledge."
Interpretive disagreements  One interpretation, known as the "two-world" interpretation, regards Kant's position as a statement of epistemological limitation, that we are not able to transcend the bounds of our own mind, meaning that we cannot access the " thing-in-itself ".
On this particular view, the thing-in-itself is not numerically identical the phenomenal empirical object.
However, Kant also speaks of the thing in itself or transcendent object as a product of the (human) understanding as it attempts to conceive of objects in abstraction from the conditions of sensibility.
Following this line of thought, some interpreters have argued that the thing in itself does not represent a separate ontological domain, but simply a way of considering objects by means of the understanding alone; this is known as the "two-aspect" view.
On this alternative view, the same objects which we attribute empirical properties like color, size, and shape are also, as considered as they are in themselves, the things-in-themselves otherwise inaccessible to human knowledge.
Kant's theory of judgment  See also: Category (Kant) Kant statue in the School of Philosophy and Human Sciences (FAFICH) in the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte , Brazil Following the "Transcendental Analytic" is the "Transcendental Logic".
Whereas the former was concerned with the contributions of the sensibility, the latter is concerned, first, with the contributions of the understanding ("Transcendental Analytic") and, second, with the faculty of reason as the source of both metaphysical errors and genuine regulatory principles ("Transcendental Dialectic").
The "Transcendental Analytic" is further divided into two sections.
The first, "Analytic of Concepts", is concerned with establishing the universality and necessity of the pure concepts of the understanding (i.e., the categories).
This section contains Kant's famous "transcendental deduction".
The second, "Analytic of Principles", is concerned with the application of those pure concepts in empirical judgments.
This second section is longer than the first and is further divided into many sub-sections.
Transcendental deduction of the categories of the understanding  The "Analytic of Concepts" argues for the universal and necessary validity of the pure concepts of the understanding, or the categories, for instance, the concepts of substance and causation.
These twelve basic categories define what it is to be a thing in general —that is, they articulate the necessary conditions according to which something is a possible object of experience.
These, in conjunction with the a priori forms of intuition, are the basis of all synthetic a priori cognition.
According to Guyer and Wood , "Kant's idea is that just as there are certain essential features of all judgments, so there must be certain corresponding ways in which we form the concepts of objects so that judgments may be about objects."
Kant provides two central lines of argumentation in support of his claims about the categories.
The first, known as the "metaphysical deduction", proceeds analytically from a table of the Aristotelian logical functions of judgment.
As Kant was aware, however, this assumes precisely what the skeptic rejects, namely, the existence of synthetic a priori cognition.
For this reason, Kant also supplies a synthetic argument that does not depend upon the assumption in dispute.
This argument, provided under the heading "Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding", is widely considered to be both the most important and the most difficult of Kant's arguments in the Critique .
Kant himself said that it is the one that cost him the most labor.
Frustrated by its confused reception in the first edition of his book, he rewrote it entirely for the second edition.
The "Transcendental Deduction" gives Kant's argument that these pure concepts apply universally and necessarily to the objects that are given in experience.
According to Guyer and Wood, "He centers his argument on the premise that our experience can be ascribed to a single identical subject, via what he calls the 'transcendental unity of apperception,' only if the elements of experience given in intuition are synthetically combined so as to present us with objects that are thought through the categories."
Kant's principle of apperception is that "The I think must be able to accompany all my representations; for otherwise something would be represented in me that could not be thought at all, which is as much as to say that the representation would either be impossible or else at least would be nothing for me."
The necessary possibility of the self-ascription of the representations of self-consciousness, identical to itself through time, is an a priori conceptual truth that cannot be based on experience.
This, however, is only a bare sketch of one of the arguments that Kant presents.
Principles of pure understanding  Kant's deduction of the categories in the "Analytic of Concepts", if successful, demonstrates its claims about the categories only in an abstract way.
The task of the "Analytic of Principles" is to show both that they must universally apply to objects given in actual experience (i.e., manifolds of intuition) and how it is they do so.
In the first book of this section on the " schematism ", Kant connects each of the purely logical categories of the understanding to the temporality of intuition to show that, although non-empirical, they do have purchase upon the objects of experience.
The second book continues this line of argument in four chapters, each associated with one of the category groupings.
In some cases, it adds a connection to the spatial dimension of intuition to the categories it analyzes.
The fourth chapter of this section, "The Analogies of Experience", marks a shift from "mathematical" to "dynamical" principles, that is, to those that deal with relations among objects.
Some commentators consider this the most significant section of the Critique .
The analogies are three in number: Principle of persistence of substance : Kant is here concerned with the general conditions of determining time-relations among the objects of experience.
He argues that the unity of time implies that "all change must consist in the alteration of states in an underlying substance, whose existence and quantity must be unchangeable or conserved."
Principle of temporal succession according to the law of causality : Here Kant argues that "we can make determinate judgments about the objective succession of events, as contrasted to merely subjective successions of representations, only if every objective alteration follows a necessary rule of succession, or a causal law."
This is Kant's most direct rejoinder to Hume's skepticism about causality .
Principle of simultaneity according to the law of reciprocity or community : The final analogy argues that "determinate judgments that objects (or states of substance) in different regions of space exists simultaneously are possible only if such objects stand in mutual causal relation of community or reciprocal interaction."
(This is Kant's rejoinder to Leibniz 's thesis in the Monadology .)
The fourth section of this chapter, which is not an analogy, deals with the empirical use of the modal categories.
That was the end of the chapter in the A edition of the Critique .
The B edition, however, includes one more short section, "The Refutation of Idealism".
In this section, by analysis of the concept of self-consciousness, Kant argues that his transcendental idealism is a "critical" or "formal" idealism that does not deny the existence of reality apart from our subjective representations.
The final chapter of "The Analytic of Principles" distinguishes phenomena , of which we have can have genuine knowledge, from noumena , a term which refers to objects of pure thought that we cannot know, but to which we may still refer "in a negative sense".
An Appendix to the section further develops Kant's criticism of Leibnizian-Wolffian rationalism by arguing that its "dogmatic" metaphysics confuses the "mere features of concepts through which we think things...
features of the objects themselves".
Against this, Kant reasserts his own insistence upon the necessity of a sensible component in all genuine knowledge.
Critique of metaphysics  The second of the two Divisions of "The Transcendental Logic", "The Transcendental Dialectic", contains the "negative" portion of Kant's Critique , which builds upon the "positive" arguments of the preceding "Transcendental Analytic" to expose the limits of metaphysical speculation.
In particular, it is concerned to demonstrate as spurious the efforts of reason to arrive at knowledge independent of sensibility.
This endeavor, Kant argues, is doomed to failure, which he claims to demonstrate by showing that reason, unbounded by sense, is always capable of generating opposing or otherwise incompatible conclusions.
Like "the light dove, in free flight cutting through the air, the resistance of which it feels", reason "could get the idea that it could do even better in airless space".
Against this, Kant claims that, absent epistemic friction, there can be no knowledge.
Nevertheless, Kant's critique is not entirely destructive.
He presents the speculative excesses of traditional metaphysics as inherent in our very capacity of reason.
Moreover, he argues that its products are not without some (carefully qualified) regulative value.
On the concepts of pure reason  Kant calls the basic concepts of metaphysics "ideas".
They are different from the concepts of understanding in that they are not limited by the critical stricture limiting knowledge to the conditions of possible experience and its objects.
"Transcendental illusion" is Kant's term for the tendency of reason to produce such ideas.
Although reason has a "logical use" of simply drawing inferences from principles, in "The Transcendental Dialectic", Kant is concerned with its purportedly "real use" to arrive at conclusions by way of unchecked regressive syllogistic ratiocination.
The three categories of relation , pursued without regard to the limits of possible experience, yield the three central ideas of traditional metaphysics: The soul : the concept of substance as the ultimate subject;  The world in its entirety : the concept of causation as a completed series; and  God : the concept of community as the common ground of all possibilities.
Although Kant denies that these ideas can be objects of genuine cognition, he argues that they are the result of reason's inherent drive to unify cognition into a systematic whole.
Leibnizian-Wolffian metaphysics was divided into four parts: ontology, psychology, cosmology, and theology.
Kant replaces the first with the positive results of the first part of the Critique .
He proposes to replace the following three with his later doctrines of anthropology, the metaphysical foundations of natural science, and the critical postulation of human freedom and morality.
The dialectical inferences of pure reason  In the second of the two Books of "The Transcendental Dialectic", Kant undertakes to demonstrate the contradictory nature of unbounded reason.
He does this by developing contradictions in each of the three metaphysical disciplines that he contends are, in fact, pseudo-sciences.
This section of the Critique is long and Kant's arguments are extremely detailed.
In this context, it not possible to do much more than enumerate the topics of discussion.
The first chapter addresses what Kant terms the paralogisms —i.e., false inferences—that pure reason makes in the metaphysical discipline of rational psychology.
He argues that one cannot take the mere thought of "I" in the proposition "I think" as the proper cognition of "I" as an object.
In this way, he claims to debunk various metaphysical theses about the substantiality, unity, and self-identity of the soul.
The second chapter, which is the longest, takes up the topic Kant calls the antinomies of pure reason—that is, the contradictions of reason with itself—in the metaphysical discipline of rational cosmology.
(Originally, Kant had thought that all transcendental illusion could be analyzed in antinomic terms.
 )
He presents four cases in which he claims reason is able to prove opposing theses with equal plausibility: That "reason seems to be able to prove that the universe is both finite and infinite in space and time";  that "reason seems to be able to prove that matter both is and is not infinitely divisible into ever smaller parts";  that "reason seems to be able to prove that free will cannot be a causally efficacious part of the world (because all of nature is deterministic) and yet that it must be such a cause"; and,  that "reason seems to be able to prove that there is and there is not a necessary being (which some would identify with God)".
Kant further argues in each case that his doctrine of transcendental idealism is able to resolve the antinomy.
The third chapter examines fallacious arguments about God in rational theology under the heading of the "Ideal of Pure Reason".
(Whereas an idea is a pure concept generated by reason, an ideal is the concept of an idea as an individual thing .
 )
Here Kant addresses and claims to refute three traditional arguments for the existence of God: the ontological argument , the cosmological argument , and the physio-theological argument (i.e., the argument from design).
The results of the transcendental dialectic so far appear to be entirely negative.
In an Appendix to this section, however, Kant rejects such a conclusion.
The ideas of pure reason, he argues, have an important regulatory function in directing and organizing our theoretical and practical inquiry.
Kant's later works elaborate upon this function at length and in detail.
Moral thought  Main article: Kantian ethics Kant developed his ethics, or moral philosophy, in three works: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785), Critique of Practical Reason (1788), and Metaphysics of Morals (1797).
With regard to morality , Kant argued that the source of the good lies not in anything outside the human subject, either in nature or given by God , but rather is only the good will itself.
A good will is one that acts from duty in accordance with the universal moral law that the autonomous human being freely gives itself.
This law obliges one to treat humanity—understood as rational agency, and represented through oneself as well as others—as an end in itself rather than (merely) as means to other ends the individual might hold.
Kant is known for his theory that all moral obligation is grounded in what he calls the " categorical imperative ", which is derived from the concept of duty .
He argues that the moral law is a principle of reason itself, not based on contingent facts about the world, such as what would make us happy; to act on the moral law has no other motive than "worthiness to be happy".
The idea of freedom  In the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant distinguishes between the transcendental idea of freedom, which as a psychological concept is "mainly empirical" and refers to "whether a faculty of beginning a series of successive things or states from itself is to be assumed",  and the practical concept of freedom as the independence of our will from the "coercion" or "necessitation through sensuous impulses".
Kant finds it a source of difficulty that the practical idea of freedom is founded on the transcendental idea of freedom,  but for the sake of practical interests uses the practical meaning, taking "no account of ...
its transcendental meaning", which he feels was properly "disposed of" in the Third Antinomy, and as an element in the question of the freedom of the will is for philosophy "a real stumbling block" that has embarrassed speculative reason.
Kant calls practical "everything that is possible through freedom"; he calls the pure practical laws that are never given through sensuous conditions, but are held analogously with the universal law of causality, moral laws.
Reason can give us only the "pragmatic laws of free action through the senses", but pure practical laws given by reason a priori  dictate "what is to be done".
Kant's categories of freedom function primarily as conditions for the possibility for actions (i) to be free, (ii) to be understood as free, and (iii) to be morally evaluated.
For Kant, although actions as theoretical objects are constituted by means of the theoretical categories, actions as practical objects (objects of practical use of reason, and which can be good or bad) are constituted by means of the categories of freedom.
Only in this way can actions, as phenomena, be a consequence of freedom, and be understood and evaluated as such.
The categorical imperative  Kant makes a distinction between categorical and hypothetical imperatives .
A hypothetical imperative is one that we must obey to satisfy contingent desires.
A categorical imperative binds us regardless of our desires: for example, everyone has a duty to respect others as individual ends in themselves, regardless of circumstances, even though it is sometimes in our narrowly selfish interest to not do so.
These imperatives are morally binding because of the categorical form of their maxims, rather than contingent facts about an agent.
Unlike hypothetical imperatives, which bind us insofar as we are part of a group or society which we owe duties to, we cannot opt out of the categorical imperative, because we cannot opt out of being rational agents .
We owe a duty to rationality by virtue of being rational agents; therefore, rational moral principles apply to all rational agents at all times.
Stated in other terms, with all forms of instrumental rationality excluded from morality, "the moral law itself, Kant holds, can only be the form of lawfulness itself, because nothing else is left once all content has been rejected".
Kant provides three formulations for the categorical imperative.
He claims that these are necessarily equivalent, as all being expressions of the pure universality of the moral law as such.
Many scholars, however, are not convinced.
The formulas are as follows: Formula of Universal Law : "Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you at the same time can will that it become a universal law";  alternatively, Formula of the Law of Nature : "So act, as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will a universal law of nature."
Formula of Humanity as End in Itself : "So act that you use humanity, as much in your own person as in the person of every other, always at the same time as an end and never merely as a means".
Formula of Autonomy : "the idea of the will of every rational being as a will giving universal law",  or "Not to choose otherwise than so that the maxims of one's choice are at the same time comprehended with it in the same volition as universal law";  alternatively, Formula of the Realm of Ends : "Act in accordance with maxims of a universally legislative member for a merely possible realm of ends."
Kant defines maxim as a "subjective principle of volition", which is distinguished from an "objective principle or 'practical law.
'
" While "the latter is valid for every rational being and is a 'principle according to which they ought to act' a maxim 'contains the practical rule which reason determines in accordance with the conditions of the subject (often their ignorance or inclinations) and is thus the principle according to which the subject does act.
'
"   Maxims fail to qualify as practical laws if they produce a contradiction in conception or a contradiction in the will when universalized.
A contradiction in conception happens when, if a maxim were to be universalized, it ceases to make sense, because the "maxim would necessarily destroy itself as soon as it was made a universal law".
For example, if the maxim 'It is permissible to break promises' was universalized, no one would trust any promises made, so the idea of a promise would become meaningless; the maxim would be self-contradictory because, when it is universalized, promises cease to be meaningful.
The maxim is not moral because it is logically impossible to universalize—that is, we could not conceive of a world where this maxim was universalized.
A maxim can also be immoral if it creates a contradiction in the will when universalized.
This does not mean a logical contradiction, but that universalizing the maxim leads to a state of affairs that no rational being would desire.
"The Doctrine of Virtue"  As Kant explains in the 1785 Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (and as its title directly indicates) that text is "nothing more than the search for and establishment of the supreme principle of morality ".
His promised Metaphysics of Morals , however, was much delayed and did not appear until its two parts, "The Doctrine of Right" and "The Doctrine of Virtue", were published separately in 1797 and 1798.
The first deals with political philosophy, the second with ethics.
"The Doctrine of Virtue" provides "a very different account of ordinary moral reasoning" than the one suggested by the Groundwork .
It is concerned with duties of virtue or "ends that are at the same time duties".
It is here, in the domain of ethics, that the greatest innovation by The Metaphysics of Morals is to be found.
According to Kant's account, "ordinary moral reasoning is fundamentally teleological—it is reasoning about what ends we are constrained by morality to pursue, and the priorities among these ends we are required to observe".
More specifically, There are two sorts of ends that it is our duty to have: our own perfection and the happiness of others ( MS 6:385).
"Perfection" includes both our natural perfection (the development of our talents, skills, and capacities of understanding) and moral perfection (our virtuous disposition) ( MS 6:387).
A person's "happiness" is the greatest rational whole of the ends the person set for the sake of her own satisfaction ( MS 6:387–388).
Kant's elaboration of this teleological doctrine offers up a moral theory very different from the one typically attributed to him on the basis of his foundational works alone.
Political philosophy  Main article: Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant Part of a series on Liberalism  Schools  Classical  Conservative  Cultural  Democratic  Feminist  Equity  Green  Internationalist  Muscular  National  Neo  Ordo  Radical  Religious  Christian  Catholic  Islamic  Jewish  Secular  Social  Techno  Third Way    Principles  Consent of the governed  Due process  Democracy  Economic liberalism  Economic globalization  Equality  Gender  Legal  Federalism  Freedom  Economic  Market  Trade  Press  Religion  Speech  Harm principle  Internationalism  Invisible hand  Labor theory of property  Laissez-faire  Liberty  Negative  Positive  Limited government  Market economy  Natural monopoly  Open society  Permissive society  Popular sovereignty  Property  Private  Public  Rights  Civil and political  Natural and legal  To own property  To bear arms  Rule of law  Secularism  Secular humanism  Separation of church and state  Separation of powers  Social contract  Social justice  Social services  Welfare state  State of nature    History  Age of Enlightenment  List of liberal theorists (contributions to liberal theory)   Philosophers  Milton  Locke  Spinoza  Montesquieu  Voltaire  Rousseau  Smith  Kant  Turgot  Burke  Priestley  Paine  Beccaria  Condorcet  Bentham  Korais  De Gouges  Wollstonecraft  Staël  Say  Humboldt  Constant  Ricardo  Guizot  List  Bastiat  Martineau  Emerson  Tocqueville  Mill  Spencer  Arnold  Acton  Weber  Hobhouse  Croce  Cassirer  Mises  Ortega  Keynes  Collingwood  Čapek  Hu  Hayek  Popper  Aron  Berlin  Friedman  Rawls  Sen  Nozick  Kymlicka  Badawi    Politicians  Jefferson  Kołłątaj  Madison  Artigas  Bolívar  Broglie  Lamartine  Macaulay  Kossuth  Deák  Cobden  Mazzini  Juárez  Lincoln  Gladstone  Cavour  Sarmiento  Mommsen  Naoroji  Itagaki  Levski  Kemal  Deakin  Milyukov  Lloyd George  Venizelos  Ståhlberg  Gokhale  Rathenau  Madero  Einaudi  King  Roosevelt  Pearson  Ohlin  Kennedy  Jenkins    Organizations  Africa Liberal Network  Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe  Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party  Arab Liberal Federation  Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats  European Democratic Party  European Liberal Youth  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties  International Federation of Liberal Youth  Liberal International  Liberal Network for Latin America  Liberal parties  Liberal South East European Network   Regional variants  Europe  Latin America  Albania  Armenia  Australia  Austria  Belgium  Bolivia  Brazil  Bulgaria  Canada  Chile  China  Hong Kong  Colombia  Costa Rica  Croatia  Cuba  Cyprus  Czechia  Denmark  Ecuador  Egypt  Estonia  Finland  France  Georgia  Germany  Greece  Venizelism  Honduras  Hungary  Iceland  India  Iran  Israel  Italy  Liberism  Japan  Latvia  Lithuania  Luxembourg  Mexico  Moldova  Montenegro  Netherlands  New Zealand  Nicaragua  Nigeria  North Macedonia  Norway  Panama  Paraguay  Peru  Philippines  Poland  Cracovian  Portugal  Romania  Russia  Senegal  Serbia  Slovakia  Slovenia  South Africa  South Korea  Spain  Sweden  Switzerland  Taiwan  Thailand  Tunisia  Turkey  Ukraine  United Kingdom  Cobdenism  Gladstonian  Manchester  Whiggism  United States  Arizona School  Classical  Jeffersonian  Modern  Uruguay  Venezuela  Zimbabwe   Related topics  Anti-authoritarianism  Anti-communism  Bias in American academia  Bias in the media  Capitalism  Democratic  Centrism  Radical centrism  Economic freedom  Egalitarianism  Empiricism  Humanism  Individualism  Anarchist  Land value tax  Libertarianism  Left  Right  Pirate Party  Sexually liberal feminism  Utilitarianism     Liberalism portal   Politics portal v t e In Towards Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Project , Kant listed several conditions that he thought necessary for ending wars and creating a lasting peace.
They included a world of constitutional republics.
His classical republican theory was extended in the Doctrine of Right , the first part of the Metaphysics of Morals (1797).
Kant believed that universal history leads to the ultimate world of republican states at peace, but his theory was not pragmatic.
The process was described in Perpetual Peace as natural rather than rational: What affords this guarantee (surety) is nothing less than the great artist nature ( natura daedala rerum ) from whose mechanical course purposiveness shines forth visibly, letting concord arise by means of the discord between human beings even against their will; and for this reason nature, regarded as necessitation by a cause the laws of whose operation are unknown to us, is called fate , but if we consider its purposiveness in the course of the world as the profound wisdom of a higher cause directed to the objective final end of the human race and predetermining this course of the world, it is called providence .
Kant's political thought can be summarized as republican government and international organization: "In more characteristically Kantian terms, it is doctrine of the state based upon the law ( Rechtsstaat ) and of eternal peace.
Indeed, in each of these formulations, both terms express the same idea: that of legal constitution or of 'peace through law.
'
"  "Kant's political philosophy, being essentially a legal doctrine, rejects by definition the opposition between moral education and the play of passions as alternate foundations for social life.
The state is defined as the union of men under law.
The state rightly so called is constituted by laws which are necessary a priori because they flow from the very concept of law.
A regime can be judged by no other criteria nor be assigned any other functions, than those proper to the lawful order as such."
He opposed "democracy", which at his time meant direct democracy , believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty.
He stated, " democracy in the strict sense of the word is necessarily a despotism because it establishes an executive power in which all decide for and, if need be, against one (who thus does not agree), so that all, who are nevertheless not all, decide; and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom."
As with most writers at the time, he distinguished three forms of government—namely, democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy—with mixed government as the most ideal form of it.
He believed in republican ideals and forms of governance, and rule of law brought on by them.
Although Kant published this as a "popular piece", Mary J.
Gregor points out that two years later, in The Metaphysics of Morals , Kant claims to demonstrate systematically that "establishing universal and lasting peace constitutes not merely a part of the doctrine of right, but rather the entire final end of the doctrine of right within the limits of mere reason".
The Doctrine of Right , published in 1797, contains Kant's most mature and systematic contribution to political philosophy.
It addresses duties according to law, which are "concerned only with protecting the external freedom of individuals" and indifferent to incentives.
(Although we do have a moral duty "to limit ourselves to actions that are right, that duty is not part of  itself".)
Its basic political idea is that "each person's entitlement to be his or her own master is only consistent with the entitlements of others if public legal institutions are in place".
Religious writings  Main article: Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Starting in the twentieth century, commentators have tended to see Kant as having a strained relationship with religion, although in the nineteenth century this had not been the prevalent view.
Karl Leonhard Reinhold , whose letters helped make Kant famous, wrote: "I believe that I may infer without reservation that the interest of religion, and of Christianity in particular, accords completely with the result of the Critique of Reason."
According to Johann Schultz , who wrote one of the first commentaries on Kant: "And does not this system itself cohere most splendidly with the Christian religion?
Do not the divinity and beneficence of the latter become all the more evident?"
The reason for these views was Kant's moral theology and the widespread belief that his philosophy was the great antithesis to Spinozism , which was widely seen as a form of sophisticated pantheism or even atheism.
As Kant's philosophy disregarded the possibility of arguing for God through pure reason alone, for the same reasons it also disregarded the possibility of arguing against God through pure reason alone.
Kant articulates his strongest criticisms of the organization and practices of religious organizations to those that encourage what he sees as a religion of counterfeit service to God.
Among the major targets of his criticism are external ritual, superstition, and a hierarchical church order.
He sees these as efforts to make oneself pleasing to God in ways other than conscientious adherence to the principle of moral rightness in choosing and acting upon one's maxims.
Kant's criticisms on these matters, along with his rejection of certain theoretical proofs for the existence of God that were grounded in pure reason (particularly the ontological argument ) and his philosophical commentary on some Christian doctrines, have resulted in interpretations that see Kant as hostile to religion in general and to Christianity in particular.
Other interpreters, nevertheless, consider that Kant was trying to mark off defensible from indefensible Christian belief.
Regarding Kant's conception of religion, some critics have argued that he was sympathetic to deism.
Other critics have argued that Kant's moral conception moves from deism to theism (as moral theism), for example, Allen W.
Wood  and Merold Westphal.
As for Kant's book Religion within the Bounds of Mere Reason , it was emphasized that Kant reduced religiosity to rationality, religion to morality, and Christianity to ethics.
However, many interpreters, including Allen W.
Wood  and Lawrence Pasternack,  now agree with Stephen Palmquist 's claim that a better way of reading Kant's Religion is to see him as raising morality to the status of religion.
Aesthetics  See also: Kant's teleology This section needs additional citations for verification .
( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Immanuel Kant Kant discusses the subjective nature of aesthetic qualities and experiences in Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (1764).
Kant's contribution to aesthetic theory is developed in the Critique of the Power of Judgment (1790), where he investigates the possibility and logical status of "judgments of taste".
In the "Critique of Aesthetic Judgment", the first major division of the Critique of the Power of Judgment , Kant used the term "aesthetic" in a manner that differs from its modern sense.
In the Critique of Pure Reason , to note essential differences between judgments of taste, moral judgments, and scientific judgments, Kant abandoned the term "aesthetic" as "designating the critique of taste", noting that judgments of taste could never be "directed" by "laws a priori ".
After A.
G.
Baumgarten , who wrote Aesthetica (1750–58),  Kant was one of the first philosophers to develop and integrate aesthetic theory into a unified and comprehensive philosophical system, utilizing ideas that played an integral role throughout his philosophy.
In the chapter "Analytic of the Beautiful" in the Critique of the Power of Judgment , Kant states that beauty is not a property of an artwork or natural phenomenon, but is instead consciousness of the pleasure that attends the 'free play' of the imagination and the understanding.
Even though it appears that we are using reason to decide what is beautiful, the judgment is not a cognitive judgment,  "and is consequently not logical, but aesthetical".
A pure judgement of taste is subjective since it refers to the emotional response of the subject and is based upon nothing but esteem for an object itself: it is a disinterested pleasure, and we feel that pure judgements of taste (i.e., judgements of beauty), lay claim to universal validity.
This universal validity is not derived from a determinate concept of beauty but from common sense .
Kant also believed that a judgement of taste shares characteristics engaged in a moral judgement: both are disinterested, and we hold them to be universal.
In the chapter "Analytic of the Sublime" Kant identifies the sublime as an aesthetic quality that, like beauty, is subjective, but unlike beauty refers to an indeterminate relationship between the faculties of the imagination and of reason, and shares the character of moral judgments in the use of reason.
The feeling of the sublime, divided into two distinct modes (the mathematical and the dynamical sublime), describes two subjective moments that concern the relationship of the faculty of the imagination to reason.
Some commentators  argue that Kant's critical philosophy contains a third kind of the sublime, the moral sublime, which is the aesthetic response to the moral law or a representation, and a development of the "noble" sublime in Kant's theory of 1764.
The mathematical sublime results from the failure of the imagination to comprehend natural objects that appear boundless and formless, or appear "absolutely great".
This imaginative failure is then recuperated through the pleasure taken in reason's assertion of the concept of infinity.
In this move the faculty of reason proves itself superior to our fallible sensible self.
In the dynamical sublime, there is the sense of annihilation of the sensible self as the imagination tries to comprehend a vast might.
This power of nature threatens us but through the resistance of reason to such sensible annihilation, the subject feels a pleasure and a sense of the human moral vocation.
This appreciation of moral feeling through exposure to the sublime helps to develop moral character.
Kant developed a theory of humor  that has been interpreted as an "incongruity" theory.
He illustrated his theory of humor by telling three narrative jokes in the Critique of Judgment .
He thought that the physiological impact of humor is akin to that of music.
Kant developed a distinction between an object of art as a material value subject to the conventions of society and the transcendental condition of the judgment of taste as a "refined" value in his Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Aim (1784).
In the Fourth and Fifth Theses of that work he identified all art as the "fruits of unsociableness" due to men's "antagonism in society"  and, in the Seventh Thesis, asserted that while such material property is indicative of a civilized state, only the ideal of morality and the universalization of refined value through the improvement of the mind "belongs to culture".
Anthropology  5 DM 1974 D silver coin commemorating the 250th birthday of Immanuel Kant in Königsberg Kant lectured on anthropology , the study of human nature, for twenty-three years.
His Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View was published in 1798.
Transcripts of Kant's lectures on anthropology were published for the first time in 1997 in German.
Kant was among the first people of his time to introduce anthropology as an intellectual area of study, long before the field gained popularity, and his texts are considered to have advanced the field.
His point of view was to influence the works of later philosophers such as Martin Heidegger and Paul Ricoeur .
Kant was also the first to suggest using a dimensionality approach to human diversity.
He analyzed the nature of the Hippocrates - Galen  four temperaments and plotted in two dimensions "what belongs to a human being's faculty of desire":
"his natural aptitude or natural predisposition" and "his temperament or sensibility".
Cholerics were described as emotional and energetic, phlegmatics as balanced and weak, sanguines as balanced and energetic, and melancholics as emotional and weak.
These two dimensions reappeared in all subsequent models of temperament and personality traits.
Kant viewed anthropology in two broad categories: (1) the physiological approach, which he referred to as "what nature makes of the human being"; and (2) the pragmatic approach, which explores the things that a human "can and should make of himself".
Racism  Kant Mixing Mustard , drawn by Carl Friedrich Hagemann  , 1801 Kant's theory of race and his prejudicial beliefs are among the most contentious areas of recent Kant scholarship.
While few, if any, dispute the overt racism and chauvinism present in his work, a more contested question is the degree to which it degrades or invalidates his other contributions.
His most severe critics assert that Kant intentionally manipulated science to support chattel slavery and discrimination.
Others acknowledge that he lived in an era of immature science, with many erroneous beliefs, some racist, all appearing decades before evolution, molecular genetics, and other sciences that today are taken for granted.
Kant was one of the most notable Enlightenment thinkers to defend racism .
Philosopher Charles W.
Mills is unequivocal: "Kant is also seen as one of the central figures in the birth of modern 'scientific' racism.
Whereas other contributors to early racial thought like Carolus Linnaeus and Johann Friedrich Blumenbach had offered only 'empirical' (scare-quotes necessary!)
observation, Kant produced a full-blown theory of race."
Using the four temperaments of ancient Greece, Kant proposed a hierarchy of racial categories including white Europeans, black Africans, and red Native Americans.
Although he was a proponent of scientific racism for much of his career, Kant's views on race changed significantly in the last decade of his life, and he ultimately rejected racial hierarchies and European colonialism in Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1795).
Kant was an opponent of miscegenation , believing that whites would be "degraded" and that "fusing of races" is undesirable, for "not every race adopts the morals and customs of the Europeans".
He states that "instead of assimilation, which was intended by the melting together of the various races, nature has here made a law of just the opposite".
Kant was also an anti-Semite, believing that Jews were incapable of transcending material forces, which a moral order required.
In this way, Jews are presented as the opposite of autonomous, rational Christians, and therefore incapable of being incorporated into an ethical Christian society.
In his "Anthropology", Kant called the Jews "a nation of cheaters" and portrayed them as "a group that has followed not the path of transcendental freedom but that of enslavement to the material world".
Charles W.
Mills wrote that Kant has been "sanitized for public consumption", his racist works conveniently ignored.
Robert Bernasconi stated that Kant "supplied the first scientific definition of race".
Emmanuel Chukwudi Eze is credited with bringing Kant's contributions to racism to light in the 1990s among Western philosophers, who he believed often glossed over this part of his life and works.
Pauline Kleingeld argues that, while Kant "did defend a racial hierarchy until at least the end of the 1780s", his views on race changed significantly in works published in the last decade of his life.
In particular, she argues that Kant rejected past views related to racial hierarchies and the diminished rights or moral status of non-whites in Perpetual Peace (1795).
This work also saw him providing extended arguments against European colonialism , which he claimed was morally unjust and incompatible with the equal rights held by indigenous populations.
Kleingeld argues that this shift in Kant's views later in life has often been forgotten or ignored in the literature on Kant's racist anthropology, and that the shift suggests a belated recognition of the fact that racial hierarchy was incompatible with a universalized moral framework.
While Kant's racist rhetoric is indicative of the state of scholarship and science during the 18th century, German philosopher Daniel-Pascal Zorn explains the risk of taking period quotations out of context.
Many of Kant's most outrageous quotations are from a series of articles from 1777–1788, a public exchange among Kant, Herder, natural scientist Georg Forster , and other scholars prominent in that period.
Kant asserts that all races of humankind are of the same species, challenging the position of Forster and others that the races were distinct species.
While his commentary is clearly biased at times, certain extreme statements were patterned specifically to paraphrase or counter Forster and other authors.
By considering the full arc of Kant's scholarship, Zorn notes the progression in both his philosophical and his anthropological works, "with which he argues, against the zeitgeist , for the unity of humanity".
Influence and legacy  This article may contain unverified or indiscriminate information in embedded lists .
Please help clean up the lists by removing items or incorporating them into the text of the article.
( April 2023 ) Poster celebrating the 300 years of the University of Königsberg , 1844.
Among others, Kant and Herbart are honored.
Kant's influence on Western thought has been profound.
Although the basic tenets of Kant's transcendental idealism (i.e., that space and time are a priori forms of human perception rather than real properties and the claim that formal logic and transcendental logic coincide) have been claimed to be falsified by modern science and logic,    and no longer set the intellectual agenda of contemporary philosophers, Kant is credited with having innovated the way philosophical inquiry has been carried on at least up to the early nineteenth century.
This shift consisted of several closely related innovations that, although highly contentious in themselves, have become important in subsequent philosophy and in the social sciences broadly construed: The human subject seen as the center of inquiry into human knowledge, such that it is impossible to philosophize about things as they exist independently of human perception or of how they are "for us";   the notion that is possible to discover and systematically explore the inherent limits of the human ability to know entirely a priori ;  the notion of the "categorical imperative", an assertion that people are naturally endowed with the ability and obligation toward right reason and acting.
Perhaps his most famous quote is drawn from the Critique of Practical Reason : "Two things fill my mind with ever new and increasing admiration and reverence...: the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me ";   the concept of "conditions of possibility", as in his notion of "the conditions of possible experience"; that is, that things, knowledge, and forms of consciousness rest on prior conditions that make them possible, so that, to understand or to know them, several conditions must be understood: the claim that objective experience is actively constituted or constructed by the functioning of the human mind;  the concept of moral autonomy as central to humanity; and  the assertion of the principle that human beings should be treated as ends rather than as mere means.
Kant's ideas have been incorporated into a variety of schools of thought.
These include German idealism ,   Marxism , positivism , phenomenology , existentialism , critical theory , linguistic philosophy , structuralism , post-structuralism , and deconstruction .
Historical influence  During his own life, much critical attention was paid to Kant's thought.
He influenced Reinhold , Fichte , Schelling , Hegel , and Novalis during the 1780s and 90s.
Statue of Immanuel Kant in Kaliningrad , Russia.
Replica by Harald Haacke  of the original by Christian Daniel Rauch lost in 1945.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge was greatly influenced by Kant and helped to spread awareness of him, and of German Idealism generally, in the UK and the US.
In his Biographia Literaria (1817), he credits Kant's ideas in coming to believe that the mind is not a passive, but an active agent in the apprehension of reality.
Hegel was one of Kant's first major critics.
In Hegel's view the entire project of setting a "transcendental subject" (i.e., human consciousness) apart from the living individual as well as from nature, history, and society was fundamentally flawed,  although parts of that very project could be put to good use in a new direction.
Similar concerns motivated Hegel's criticisms of Kant's concept of moral autonomy, to which Hegel opposed an ethic focused on the "ethical life" of the community.
In a sense, Hegel's notion of "ethical life" is meant to subsume, rather than replace, Kantian ethics .
And Hegel can be seen as trying to defend Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "desires", by means of reason.
Thus, in contrast to later critics like Nietzsche or Russell, Hegel shares some of Kant's concerns.
Kant's thinking on religion was used in Britain by philosophers such as Thomas Carlyle  to challenge the nineteenth-century decline in religious faith.
British Catholic writers, notably G.
K.
Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc , followed this approach.
Criticisms of Kant were common in the realist views of the new positivism at that time.
Arthur Schopenhauer was strongly influenced by Kant's transcendental idealism .
He, like G.
E.
Schulze , Jacobi , and Fichte before him, was critical of Kant's theory of the thing-in-itself.
Things-in-themselves, they argued, are neither the cause of what we observe, nor are they completely beyond our access.
Ever since the Critique of Pure Reason , philosophers have been critical of Kant's theory of the thing-in-itself.
Many have argued that, if such a thing exists beyond experience, then one cannot posit that it affects us causally, since that would entail stretching the category "causality" beyond the realm of experience.
With the success and wide influence of Hegel's writings, Kant's own influence began to wane, but a re-examination of his ideas began in Germany in 1865 with the publication of Kant und die Epigonen by Otto Liebmann , whose motto was "Back to Kant".
There proceeded an important revival of Kant's theoretical philosophy, known as Neo-Kantianism .
Weimar Republic stamp honoring Kant, 1926 Kant's notion of "critique" has been more broadly influential.
The early German Romantics, especially Friedrich Schlegel in his "Athenaeum Fragments", used Kant's reflexive conception of criticism in their Romantic theory of poetry.
Also in aesthetics , Clement Greenberg , in his classic essay "Modernist Painting", uses Kantian criticism, what Greenberg refers to as "immanent criticism", to justify the aims of abstract painting , a movement Greenberg saw as aware of the key limitation—flatness—that makes up the medium of painting.
French philosopher Michel Foucault was also greatly influenced by Kant's notion of "critique" and wrote several pieces on Kant for a re-thinking of the Enlightenment as a form of "critical thought".
He went so far as to classify his own philosophy as a "critical history of modernity, rooted in Kant".
Kant believed that mathematical truths were forms of synthetic a priori knowledge, which means they are necessary and universal, yet known through the a priori intuition of space and time, as transcendental preconditions of experience.
Kant's often brief remarks about mathematics influenced the mathematical school known as intuitionism , a movement in philosophy of mathematics opposed to Hilbert 's formalism , and Frege and Bertrand Russell 's logicism .
Influence on modern thinkers  West German postage stamp, 1974, commemorating the 250th anniversary of Kant's birth With his Perpetual Peace , Kant is considered to have foreshadowed many of the ideas that have come to form the democratic peace theory , one of the main controversies in political science .
More concretely, Constructivist theorist Alexander Wendt proposed that the anarchy of the international system could evolve from the 'brutish' Hobbesian anarchy understood by Realist theorists, through Lockean anarchy, and ultimately a Kantian anarchy in which states would see their self-interests as inextricably linked to the well being of other states, thus transforming international politics into a far more peaceful form.
Prominent recent Kantians include the British philosophers P.
F.
Strawson ,   Onora O'Neill ,  and Quassim Cassam ,  and the American philosophers Wilfrid Sellars  and Christine Korsgaard .
Due to the influence of Strawson and Sellars, among others, there has been a renewed interest in Kant's view of the mind.
Central to many debates in philosophy of psychology and cognitive science is Kant's conception of the unity of consciousness.
Jürgen Habermas and John Rawls are two significant political and moral philosophers whose work is strongly influenced by Kant's moral philosophy.
They have argued against relativism,  supporting the Kantian view that universality is essential to any viable moral philosophy.
Mou Zongsan 's study of Kant has been cited as a highly crucial part in the development of Mou's personal philosophy, namely New Confucianism .
Widely regarded as the most influential Kant scholar in China, Mou's rigorous critique of Kant's philosophy—having translated all three of Kant's critiques —served as an ardent attempt to reconcile Chinese and Western philosophy whilst increasing pressure to westernize in China.
East German commemorative coin honoring Kant, 1974 Kant's influence has also extended to the social, behavioral, and physical sciences—as in the sociology of Max Weber , the psychology of Jean Piaget and Carl Gustav Jung ,   and the linguistics of Noam Chomsky .
Kant's work on mathematics and synthetic a priori knowledge is also cited by theoretical physicist Albert Einstein as an early influence on his intellectual development, though one which he later criticized and rejected.
In recent years, there has also been renewed interest in Kant's theory of mind from the point of view of formal logic and computer science .
Because of the thoroughness of Kant's paradigm shift, his influence extends well beyond this to thinkers who neither specifically refer to his work nor use his terminology.
Bibliography  Unless otherwise noted, all citations are to The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant in English Translation , 16 vols., ed.
Guyer, Paul, and Wood, Allen W.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Citations in the article are to individual works per abbreviations in List of Major works below.
Lectures on Logic .
Ed.
and trans.
J.
Michael Young.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Opus postumum .
Eckart Förster, trans.
Eckart Förster and Michael Rosen.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993  Practical Philosophy .
Mary J.
Gregor.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Religion and Rational Theology .
and trans.Allen W.
Wood and George di Giovanni.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996  Lectures on Metaphysics .
Karl Ameriks and Steve Naragon.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Lectures on Ethics .
Peter Heath and J.B. Schneewind, trans.
Peter Heath.
Critique of Pure Reason .
Paul Guyer and Allen W.
Wood.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Correspondence .
Arnulf Zweig.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Critique of the Power of Judgment .
Paul Guyer, trans.
Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Theoretical Philosophy after 1781 .
Henry Allison and Peter Heath, trans.
Gary Hatfield, Michael Friedman, Henry Allison, and Peter Heath.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Notes and Fragments .
Curtis Bowman, Paul Guyer, and Frederick Rauscher.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Anthropology, History, and Education , Ed.
Günter Zöller and Robert B.
Louden.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Lectures on Anthropology , Ed.
Allen W.
Wood and Robert B.
Louden Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Natural Science , Ed.
Eric Watkins.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
List of major works  Abbreviations used in body of article are boldface in brackets.
Unless otherwise noted, pagination is to the critical Akademie edition, which can be found in the margins of the Cambridge translations.
1749: Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces ( Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung der lebendigen Kräfte )  1755: Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens  ( Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels )  1755: Brief Outline of Certain Meditations on Fire ( Meditationum quarundam de igne succinta delineatio ( master's thesis under Johann Gottfried Teske ))      1755: A New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition ( Principiorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio ( doctoral thesis ))    1756: The Use in Natural Philosophy of Metaphysics Combined with Geometry, Part I: Physical Monadology  ( Metaphysicae cum geometrica iunctae usus in philosophia naturali, cuius specimen I.
continet monadologiam physicam , abbreviated as Monadologia Physica (thesis as a prerequisite of associate professorship))   1762: The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures ( Die falsche Spitzfindigkeit der vier syllogistischen Figuren )  1763: The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God ( Der einzig mögliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes )  1763: Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy  ( Versuch den Begriff der negativen Größen in die Weltweisheit einzuführen )  1764: Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime  ( Beobachtungen über das Gefühl des Schönen und Erhabenen )  1764: Essay on the Illness of the Head ( Über die Krankheit des Kopfes )  1764: Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (the Prize Essay )  ( Untersuchungen über die Deutlichkeit der Grundsätze der natürlichen Theologie und der Moral )  1766: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer  ( Träume eines Geistersehers )   1768: On the Ultimate Ground of the Differentiation of Regions in Space  ( Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume )   1770: Dissertation on the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World  ( De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis )     1775: On the Different Races of Man ( Über die verschiedenen Rassen der Menschen )  1781: First edition of the Critique of Pure Reason   ( Kritik der reinen Vernunft )   1783: Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics  ( Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik )  1784: " An Answer to the Question: What Is Enlightenment?
"
(" Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?
")
1784: " Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose "  (" Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltbürgerlicher Absicht ")  1785: "Determination of the Concept of a Human Race"  ( Bestimmung des Begriffs einer Menschenrace )  1785: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals  ( Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten )  1786: Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science  ( Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft )  1786: " What does it mean to orient oneself in thinking?
"
(" Was heißt: sich im Denken orientieren?
")
1786: Conjectural Beginning of Human History  ( Mutmaßlicher Anfang der Menschengeschichte )  1787: Second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason   ( Kritik der reinen Vernunft )   1788: Critique of Practical Reason  ( Kritik der praktischen Vernunft )   1790: Critique of Judgment  ( Kritik der Urteilskraft )   1793: Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason  ( Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der bloßen Vernunft )    1793: On the Old Saw: That May be Right in Theory But It Won't Work in Practice  (Über den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber nicht für die Praxis)  1795: Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch   (" Zum ewigen Frieden ")   1797: Metaphysics of Morals  ( Metaphysik der Sitten ).
First part is The Doctrine of Right, which has often been published separately as The Science of Right.
1798: Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View  ( Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht )  1798: Conflict of Faculties   ( Der Streit der Fakultäten )   1800: Logic ( Logik )  1803: On Pedagogy ( Über Pädagogik )   1804: Opus Postumum   1817: Lectures on Philosophical Theology ( Immanuel Kants Vorlesungen über die philosophische Religionslehre edited by K.H.L.
Pölitz)   Collected works in German  Wilhelm Dilthey inaugurated the Academy edition (the Akademie-Ausgabe abbreviated as AA or Ak ) of Kant's writings ( Gesammelte Schriften , Königlich-Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften , Berlin, 1902–38) in 1895,  and served as its first editor.
The volumes are grouped into four sections: I.
Kant's published writings (vols.
1–9),  II.
Kant's correspondence (vols.
10–13),  III.
Kant's literary remains, or Nachlass (vols.
14–23), and  IV.
Student notes from Kant's lectures (vols.
24–29).
An electronic version is also available: Elektronische Edition der Gesammelten Werke Immanuel Kants (vols.
1–23).
Notes    ^  UK : / k æ n t / ,    US : / k ɑː n t / ,    German:   ;     ^  Kant himself seems to have found his contribution not significant enough that he published his arguments in a newspaper commentary on the prize question and did not submit them to the Academy: "Whether the Earth has Undergone an Alteration of its Axial Rotation" .
Kant's Cosmogony .
Translated by Hastie, William.
Glasgow: James Maclehose.
1900 .
1–11 .
Retrieved 29 March 2022 .
The prize was instead awarded in 1756 to P.
Frisi, who incorrectly argued against the slowing down of the spin.
^  Since he had written his last habilitation thesis 14 years earlier, a new habilitation thesis was required (see S.J.
McGrath, Joseph Carew (eds.
), Rethinking German Idealism , Palgrave Macmillan, 2016, p.
24).
^  It has been noted that in 1778, in response to one of these offers by a former pupil, Kant wrote, "Any change makes me apprehensive, even if it offers the greatest promise of improving my condition, and I am persuaded by this natural instinct of mine that I must take heed if I wish that the threads which the Fates spin so thin and weak in my case to be spun to any length.
My great thanks, to my well-wishers and friends, who think so kindly of me as to undertake my welfare, but at the same time a most humble request to protect me in my current condition from any disturbance."
^  More technically, Kant puts his general point that all genuine knowledge requires both sensory input and intellectual organization by saying that all knowledge requires both "intuitions" and "concepts" (e.g., A 50 / B 74).
Intuitions and concepts are two different species of the genus "representation" ( Vorstellung ), Kant's most general term for any cognitive state (see A 320 / B 376–7).
At the outset of the "Transcendental Aesthetic", Kant states that an "intuition" is our most direct or "immediate" kind of representation of objects, in contrast to a "concept" which always represents an object "through a detour ( indirecte )"—that is, merely by some "mark" or property that the object has (A 19 / B 33).
In his logic textbook, Kant defines an intuition as a " singular representation"—that is, one that represents a particular object—while a concept is always a " universal ( repraesentation per notas communes )", which represents properties common to many objects ( Logic , §1, 9:91).
^  Beardsley, Monroe.
"History of Aesthetics".
Encyclopedia of Philosophy .
1, section on "Toward a unified aesthetics", p.
25, Macmillan 1973.
Baumgarten coined the term "aesthetics" and expanded, clarified, and unified Wolffian aesthetic theory, but had left the Aesthetica unfinished (See also: Tonelli, Giorgio.
"Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten".
1, Macmillan 1973).
In Bernard's translation of the Critique of Judgment he indicates in the notes that Kant's reference in § 15 in regard to the identification of perfection and beauty is probably a reference to Baumgarten.
^  Kant's general discussions of the distinction between "cognition" and "conscious of" are also given in the Critique of Pure Reason (notably A320/B376), and section V and the conclusion of section VIII of his Introduction in Logic .
^  Kant wrote that " contain all the impulses of nature in affects and passions, all talents, all dispositions to culture and civilization and can as readily obey as govern.
They are the only ones who always advance to perfection."
He describes South Asians as "educated to the highest degree but only in the arts and not in the sciences".
He goes on that Hindustanis can never reach the level of abstract concepts and that a "great hindustani man" is one who has "gone far in the art of deception and has much money".
He states that the Hindus always stay the way they are and can never advance.
About black Africans, Kant wrote that "they can be educated but only as servants, that is they allow themselves to be trained".
To Kant, "the Negro can be disciplined and cultivated, but is never genuinely civilized.
He falls of his own accord into savagery."
Native Americans, Kant opined, "cannot be educated".
He calls them unmotivated, lacking affect, passion and love, and describes them as too weak for labor, unfit for any culture, and too phlegmatic for diligence.
He said that Native Americans are "far below the Negro, who undoubtedly holds the lowest of all remaining levels by which we designate the different races".
Kant stated that "Americans and Blacks cannot govern themselves.
They thus serve only for slaves."
^  Oliver A.
Johnson claims, "With the possible exception of Plato's Republic , ( Critique of Pure Reason ) is the most important philosophical book ever written."
Article on Kant within the collection Great thinkers of the Western World , Ian P.
McGreal, Ed., HarperCollins, 1992.
^  Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Natural Law: The Scientific Ways of Treating Natural Law, Its Place in Moral Philosophy, and Its Relation to the Positive Sciences .
trans.
T.
M.
Knox.
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975.
Hegel's mature view and his concept of "ethical life" is elaborated in his Philosophy of Right .
Hegel, Philosophy of Right .
Oxford University Press, 1967.
^  Robert Pippin's Hegel's Idealism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989) emphasizes the continuity of Hegel's concerns with Kant's.
Robert Wallace, Hegel's Philosophy of Reality, Freedom, and God (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005) explains how Hegel's Science of Logic defends Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "inclinations", contra skeptics such as David Hume.
^  For a review of this problem and the relevant literature see The Thing in Itself and the Problem of Affection in the revised edition of Henry Allison's Kant's Transcendental Idealism .
^  Körner, Stephan , The Philosophy of Mathematics , Dover, 1986.
For an analysis of Kant's writings on mathematics see, Friedman, Michael, Kant and the Exact Sciences , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1992.
^  Strawson, P.
F., The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason .
Routledge: 2004.
When first published in 1966, this book forced many Anglo-American philosophers to reconsider Kant's Critique of Pure Reason .
^  Korsgaard, Christine.
Creating the Kingdom of Ends .
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
ISBN  978-0-521-49644-5  Not a commentary, but a defense of a broadly Kantian approach to ethics .
^  Brook, Andrew .
Kant and the Mind .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
See also, Meerbote, R.
"Kant's Functionalism ".
In: J.
C.
Smith, ed.
Historical Foundations of Cognitive Science .
Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1991.
Brook has an article on Kant's View of the Mind in the Stanford Encyclopedia  Archived 9 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine   ^  See Habermas, J.
Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action .
Trans.
Christian Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996.
For Rawls see, Rawls, John.
Theory of Justice Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1971.
Rawls has a well-known essay on Kant's concept of good.
See, Rawls, "Themes in Kant's Moral Philosophy" in Kant's Transcendental Deductions .
Eckart Förster.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1989.
^  vailable online at Bonner Kant-Korpus  Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .
^  As noted by Allen W.
Wood in his Introduction, p.
12.
Wood further speculates that the lectures themselves were delivered in the Winter of 1783–84.
References  Citations    ^  "Kant"  Archived 27 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine .
Collins English Dictionary .
^  "Kant"  Archived 23 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine .
Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .
^  Wells, John C.
(2008).
Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.).
Longman.
ISBN  978-1-4058-8118-0 .
^  Jones, Daniel (2011).
Roach, Peter ; Setter, Jane ; Esling, John (eds.).
Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.).
ISBN  978-0-521-15255-6 .
^  "Immanuel" .
Duden (in German).
Archived from the original on 20 December 2020 .
Retrieved 20 October 2018 .
^  "Kant" .
Archived from the original on 20 October 2018 .
^  "Immanuel Kant | Biography, Philosophy, Books, & Facts | Britannica" .
22 January 2024.
^  "A Critical Analysis of Immanuel Kant's Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals" .
16 August 2023.
^  "Bourdieu, Kant and Art – Michael Grenfell" .
^  "Immanuel Kant (1724–1804)".
Modern German Thought from Kant to Habermas: An Annotated German-Language Reader .
Studies in German Literature Linguistics and Culture.
Boydell & Brewer.
16 August 2023.
pp.
21–56.
ISBN  9781571137708 .
^  Khan, Naveeda (25 March 2021).
"Kant and Anthropology"  (PDF) .
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Anthropology .
doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190854584.013.311 .
ISBN  978-0-19-085458-4 .
Retrieved 9 November 2023 .
^  "Cosmopolis" .
Koenigsberg-is-dead.de.
23 April 2001.
Archived from the original on 22 March 2009 .
Retrieved 24 July 2009 .
^  R.K. Murray, "The Origin of Immanuel Kant's Family Name", Kantian Review  13 (1), March 2008, pp.
190–193.
^  Rosa Kohlheim, Volker Kohlheim, Duden – Familiennamen: Herkunft und Bedeutung von 20.000 Nachnamen , Bibliographisches Institut & F.A.
Brockhaus AG, Mannheim 2005, p.
365.
^  Kuehn 2001 , p.
26.
^  Haupt, Viktor.
"Rede des Bohnenkönigs – Von Petersburg bis Panama – Die Genealogie der Familie Kant"  (PDF) .
freunde-kants.com (in German).
Archived from the original on 25 September 2015.
^  Pasternack, Lawrence; Fugate, Courtney (2020).
"Kant's Philosophy of Religion" .
In Zalta, Edward N.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.).
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University .
Retrieved 25 February 2021 .
^  Kuehn 2001, p.
47.
^  Kuehn 2001 , p.
169.
^  The American International Encyclopedia (New York: J.J. Little & Ives, 1954), Vol.
^  Porter, Burton (2010).
What the Tortoise Taught Us: The Story of Philosophy .
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
p.
133 .
^  "Die Freimaurer im Alten Preußen 1738–1806"  (PDF) (in German).
Archived  (PDF) from the original on 19 November 2020.
^  Kuehn 2001 , p.
94.
^  Kuehn 2001 , p.
98.
^  Eric Watkins (ed.
), Immanuel Kant: Natural Science , Cambridge University Press, 2012: "Thoughts on the true estimation..."  Archived 7 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .
^  Schönfeld, Martin (2000).
The Philosophy of the Young Kant: The Precritical Project .
p.
84.
ISBN  978-0-19-513218-2 .
^ a  b  Brush, Stephen G.
(2014).
A History of Modern Planetary Physics: Nebulous Earth .
p.
7 .
ISBN  978-0-521-44171-1 .
^  See: Kant, I.
(1756a) "Von den Ursachen der Erderschütterungen bei Gelegenheit des Unglücks, welches die westliche Länder von Europa gegen das Ende des vorigen Jahres betroffen hat"  In: Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences), ed.s (1902) Kant's gesammelte Schriften  (in German) Berlin, Germany: G.
Reimer.
vol.
1, pp.
417–427.
Kant, I.
(1756b) "Geschichte und Naturbeschreibung der merkwürdigsten Vorfälle des Erdbebens, welches an dem Ende des 1755sten Jahres einen großen Theil der Erde erschüttert hat" , ibid.
429–461.
(1756c) "Immanuel Kants fortgesetzte Betrachtung der seit einiger Zeit wahrgenommenen Erderschütterungen" , ibid.
463–472.
Amador, Filomena (2004) "The causes of 1755 Lisbon earthquake on Kant" In: Escribano Benito, J.J.; Español González, L.; Martínez García, M.A., ed.s.
Actas VIII Congreso de la Sociedad Española de Historia de las Ciencias y de las Técnicas  (in English) Logroño, Spain: Sociedad Española de Historia de las Ciencias y de las Técnicas (Universidad de la Rioja), vol.
2, pp.
485–495.
^ a  b  Richards, Paul (1974).
"Kant's Geography and Mental Maps".
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers (61): 1–16.
doi : 10.2307/621596 .
JSTOR  621596 .
^  Elden, Stuart (2009).
"Reassessing Kant's geography"  (PDF) .
Journal of Historical Geography .
35 (1): 3–25.
doi : 10.1016/j.jhg.2008.06.001 .
Archived  (PDF) from the original on 1 August 2020 .
Retrieved 27 September 2019 .
^  Gamow, George (1947).
One Two Three...
Infinity .
New York: Viking P.
pp.
300ff.
^  Cf., for example, Susan Shell, The Embodiment of Reason (Chicago, 1996)   ^  Watkins, Erik (2009).
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason: Background Source Materials .
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
p.
276.
ISBN  978-0-521-78162-6 .
^ a  b  Smith, Homer W.
(1952).
Man and His Gods .
New York: Grosset & Dunlap .
p.
404 .
^  Kant, PFM 4:260   ^  Christopher Kul-Want and Andrzej Klimowski, Introducing Kant (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2005).
ISBN  978-1-84046-664-5   ^  Smith, Homer W.
(1952).
New York: Grosset & Dunlap.
p.
416 .
^  Dorrien, Gary (2012).
Kantian Reason and Hegelian Spirit: The Idealistic Logic of Modern Theology .
Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN  978-0-470-67331-7 .
^  Kuehn 2001 , pp.
250–254.
^  Copleston, Frederick Charles (2003).
The Enlightenment: Voltaire to Kant .
p.
146.
^  Sassen, Brigitte.
Kant's Early Critics: The Empiricist Critique of the Theoretical Philosophy .
2000.
^  Ein Jahrhundert deutscher Literaturkritik , vol.
III, Der Aufstieg zur Klassik in der Kritik der Zeit (Berlin, 1959), p.
315; as quoted in Gulyga, Arsenij.
Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought .
Trans., Marijan Despaltović.
Boston: Birkhäuser, 1987.
268–269.
^  Guyer, Paul (2006).
The Cambridge Companion to Kant and Modern Philosophy .
p.
631.
ISBN  978-0-521-82303-6 .
^ a  b  Werner S.
Pluhar, Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason  Archived 4 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine .
2009.
Description  Archived 1 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine & Contents.
With an Introduction  Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine by Stephen Palmquist.
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company,   ^ a  b  c  d  e  Derrida, Vacant Chair p.
44.
^  "Open letter by Kant denouncing Fichte's Philosophy" .
Korpora.org (in German).
Archived from the original on 19 July 2011 .
^  Peirce, C.S., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , v.
1, (HUP, 1960), 'Kant and his Refutation of Idealism' p.
15   ^  Kant, Immanuel, Logic , G.B.
Jäsche (ed), R.S.
Hartman, W.
Schwarz (translators), Indianapolis, 1984, p.
xv.
^  Karl Vorländer, Immanuel Kant: Der Mann und das Werk , Hamburg: Meiner, 1992, p.
II 332.
^  "Heine on Immanuel Kant"  (PDF) .
Archived  (PDF) from the original on 23 November 2015 .
Retrieved 10 July 2015 .
^  Examined Lives, From Socrates to Nietzsche , James Miller p.
284   ^  Immanuel Kant and the Bo(a)rders of Art History Mark Cheetham, in The Subjects of Art History: Historical Objects in Contemporary Perspectives , p.
16   ^  Beyer, Susanne (25 July 2014).
"Resurrecting Königsberg: Russian City Looks to German Roots" .
Spiegel Online .
Archived from the original on 4 February 2018 .
Retrieved 3 February 2018 .
^  "Executive order on establishing Immanuel Kant University" .
13 October 2010.
^  Kant CPuR Bxxviii–Bxxx   ^  di Giovanni 2005 .
^  Rohlf 2020 , §2.1.
^  Kant, CPuR A804–05/B833   ^  Kant, CPuR Bxxx   ^  Guyer 2014 , pp.
7–8.
^  Jankowiak 2023 .
^  Guyer 2014 , pp.
6–8.
^  di Giovanni, George.
(1996) "Translator's Introduction", In Religion and Rational Theology .
p.49, citing Kant in correspondence with Stäudlin.
^  Rohlf 2020 .
^  "Immanuel Kant (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .
Archived from the original on 14 November 2019 .
Retrieved 29 May 2019 .
^  Kant, CPuR B135   ^  Guyer 2014 , p.
51.
^  Kant, CPuR B1–3   ^  Kant, CPuR A6–8/B10–12   ^ a  b  Guyer 2014 , pp.
52–54.
^  Hume, David.
An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding .
Section 4; Part 1.
^  Kant, CPuR B3–4   ^  Kant, CPuR B14–17   ^  Guyer 2014 , p.
55.
^  Kant, CPuR A15/B29, emphases added   ^  Guyer 2014 , pp.
32, 61.
^  Rohlf 2020 , §2.12.
60–61.
^  Kant, CPuR A51/B75   ^  Kant, CPuR Bxvi–xviii   ^  Rohlf 2020 , §2.2.
^  Jankowiak 2023 , 2(g).
^  Guyer 2014 , ch.
^  Kant, CPuR B21   ^  Kant, CPuR Axi–xii   ^  Jankowiak 2023 , §2(d).
^ a  b  Rohlf 2020 , §3.
^  Kant CPuR A43/B59–60, A369   ^  Kant CPuR A28/B44, A34–35/B51–51   ^  Stang 2022 , §2.3.
^  Guyer 2014 , p.
60.
^  Rohlf 2020 , §§3.1–3.2.
^  Stang 2022 , §§4–5.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp.
4–13.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
8.
89–90.
^  Kant, CPuR Axi   ^  Jankowiak 2023 , §2(e).
^  Rohlf 2020 , §4.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
9.
^  Kant, CPuR B131-32   ^  Rohlf 2020 , §4.1.
9–10.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
11.
^  see Kant, CPuR A182–26/B224–36   ^  see Kant, CPuR A186–211/B232–56   ^  see Kant, CPuR A211-15/B256-62   ^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp.
11–12.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
12.
12–13.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
13.
^  Kant, CPuR A5/B8   ^ a  b  Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g).
^ a  b  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
15.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
14.
^  Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g.i).
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
16.
^ a  b  Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g.ii).
16–17.
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
17.
^  Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g.iii).
^  Guyer & Wood 1998 , p.
18.
^  Kant, CPuR A806/B834   ^ a  b  c  Kant, CPuR A448/B467   ^  Kant, CPuR A533–34/B561–62   ^  Kant, CPuR A800–02/B 828–30   ^  Susanne Bobzien , 'Die Kategorien der Freiheit bei Kant', in Kant: Analysen, Probleme, Kritik Vol.
1, 1988, 193–220.
^  Driver 2007, p.
83.
^  Johnson 2008 .
^  Schneewind 2010 , p.
261.
^  Kant, G .
4:420–421, 436.
^  Wood, Allen.
(2017) Formulas of the Moral Law .
Cambridge University Press, pp.
74–78   ^ a  b  Kant, G 4:421   ^  Kant, G 4:429   ^  Kant, G 4:431; cf.
4:432   ^  Kant, G 4:440; cf.
4:432, 434, 438   ^  Kant, G 4:439; cf.
4:433, 437–439   ^  Wood, Allen.
Cambridge University Press, p.6   ^  Caygill, Howard.
(1995) A Kant Dictionary .
Blackwell Publishing, p.
289, citing GMM .
^  Kant, G 4:403.
^  Driver 2007, p.
88.
^  Kant, GMM 4:392.
^  Gregor, Mary J.
(1996) "Translator's note on the text of The metaphysics of morals".
In Practical Philosophy .
The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, p.
355.
^ a  b  Wood 2006 , p.
68.
^  Kant, MM .
6:382–391.
^  Wood 2006 , p.
69.
^  Wood 2006 , p.
70.
^  Kant, PP 8:349–353   ^  Manfred Riedel, Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy , Cambridge 1984   ^  Kant, PP 8:360–362   ^  Hassner, Pierre.
"Immanuel Kant", in History of Political Philosophy , edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, The University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp.
581–582   ^  Hassner, Pierre.
"Immanuel Kant", in History of Political Philosophy , edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, The University of Chicago Press, 1987, p.
603   ^  Kant, PP 8:352   ^  Kant, MM 6:355   ^  Gregor, Mary J.
"Introduction", in Practical Philosophy .
Cambridge University Press, p.
313   ^  Ripstein, Arthur.
(2009) Force and Freedom: Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy .
Harvard University Press, p.
9.
^  Karl Leonhard Reinhold, Letters on the Kantian Philosophy (1786), 3rd Letter   ^  Johann Schultz, Exposition of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (1784), 141.
^  Kant, RBMR Part IV, First part, First section    ^  E.g.,
Walsh, W.
H., 1967, "Kant, Immanuel: Philosophy of Religion", The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Volume Four, Paul Edwards (ed.
), New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. Inc.
& The Free Press, 322.
^  Pasternack, Lawrence; Rossi, Philip.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 ed.).
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Archived from the original on 9 July 2010 .
Retrieved 18 October 2019 .
^  For example Peter Byrne, who wrote about Kant's relationship with deism.
Byrne, Peter (2007), Kant on God , London: Ashgate, p.
159.
^  Wood, Allen W.
(1970), Kant's moral religion , London and Ithaca: Cornell University Press, p.
16.
^  Westphal, Merold (2010), The Emerge of Modern Philosophy of Religion , in Taliaferro, Charles, Draper, Paul and Quinn, Philip (editors), A Companion to Philosophy of Religion , Oxford: Blackwell, p.
135.
^  Iţu, Mircia (2004), Dumnezeu şi religia în concepţia lui Immanuel Kant din Religia în limitele raţiunii , in Boboc, Alexandru and Mariş, N.I.
(editors), Studii de istoria filosofiei universale , volume 12, Bucharest: Romanian Academy.
^  Wood, Allen W.
(2020), Kant and Religion , Cambridge University Press, p.2.
^  See e.g., Lawrence Pasternack, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Kant on Religion within the Boundaries of Mere Reason (New York, Routledge, 2014), pp.
239–240.
^  Palmquist, Stephen (1992), "Does Kant Reduce Religion to Morality?
", Kant-Studien 83.2, pp.
129–148.
^  Critique of Judgment in "Kant, Immanuel" Encyclopedia of Philosophy .
Vol 4.
Macmillan, 1973.
^  Kant, CPuR A22/B36   ^  German Idealism in "History of Aesthetics" Encyclopedia of Philosophy .
Vol 1.
^  Kant, CPJ §1   ^  Kant, CPJ §§ 20–22   ^  Kant, CPJ §40   ^  Clewis, Robert (2009).
"The Kantian Sublime and the Revelation of Freedom" .
Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 .
Retrieved 8 December 2011 .
^  Kant, CPJ §§23–25   ^  Kant, CPJ §§25–26   ^  Kant, CPJ §54   ^  Jakobidze-Gitman, Alexander (2020).
"Kant's Situated Approach to Musicking and Joking".
Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies .
10 : 17–33.
doi : 10.25364/24.10:2020.2 .
^  Kant, UH 8:20–22   ^  Kant, UH 8:24–26.
^  Wilson, Holly (2006).
Kant's Pragmatic Anthropology .
Albany: State University of New York Press.
ISBN  978-0-7914-6849-4 .
^  Thomas Sturm, Kant und die Wissenschaften vom Menschen (Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2009).
^  Piercey, Robert; Philosophy Documentation Center (2011).
"Kant and the Problem of Hermeneutics: Heidegger and Ricoeur on the Transcendental Schematism" .
Idealistic Studies .
41 (3): 187–202.
doi : 10.5840/idstudies201141315 .
ISSN  0046-8541 .
^  Kant APPV 7:285   ^  Kant APPV 7:119   ^ a  b  c  d  Mikkelsen, Jon M., ed.
(2013).
Kant and the Concept of Race .
Albany, New York: State University of New York Press.
12–30.
ISBN  978-1438443614 .
^ a  b  c  d  Zorn, Daniel-Pascal (2020).
"Kant—a Racist?"
Public History Weekly .
2020 (8).
doi : 10.1515/phw-2020-17156 .
ISSN  2197-6376 .
S2CID  225247836 .
^ a  b  c  Kleingeld 2007 , pp.
573–592.
^  Eze, Emmanuel (1997).
"The Color of Reason: the Idea of 'Race' in Kant's Anthropology".
In Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (ed.).
Postcolonial African Philosophy: A Critical Reader .
Blackwell.
103–140 .
Retrieved 20 April 2023 .
^  Serequeberhan, T.
(1996).
"Eurocentrism in Philosophy: the Case of Immanuel Kant".
The Philosophical Forum .
S2CID  170547963 .
^  "The Philosophy Junkie: Immanuel Kant's Racism and Sexism with Professors Lucy Allais and Helga Varden on Apple Podcasts" .
Apple Podcasts .
^  Geismann, Georg (1 January 2022).
"Why Kant Was Not a 'Racist' " .
Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik/Annual Review of Law and Ethics .
30 (1): 263–357.
doi : 10.3790/jre.30.1.263 .
ISSN  0944-4610 .
S2CID  255676303 .
^  Mills 2017 , p.
95.
^ a  b  Kant, Immanuel (1997) .
Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (ed.).
On the Different Races of Man .
Cambridge, Mass.
: Blackwell.
38–49.
ISBN  0-631-20136-X .
OCLC  34663347 .
{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help )   ^  Mills 2017 , pp.
91–112.
^  Mills 2017 , pp.
169–193.
^  Bowersox 2016 .
^  Kant APPV 7:320   ^  Shrage 2019 .
95–97.
^  Bouie 2018 .
^  Mikkelsen, Jon M., ed.
Kant and the Concept of Race: late eighteenth-century writings .
Jon M.
Mikkelsen.
ISBN  978-1-4619-4312-9 .
OCLC  861693001 .
298–301, 343–345.
^  cf.
Kant, DCHR 8:91-106   ^  Strawson, Peter.
Bounds of Sense: Essay on Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason" .
ASIN  0415040302 .
^  "Einstein on Kant" .
University of Pittsburgh.
Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 .
Retrieved 2 September 2020 .
^  Perrick, Michael (1985).
"Kant and Kripke on Necessary Empirical Truths".
94 (376): 596–598.
doi : 10.1093/mind/XCIV.376.596 .
ISSN  0026-4423 .
JSTOR  2254731 .
^  Stephen Palmquist, "The Architectonic Form of Kant's Copernican Logic", Metaphilosophy 17:4 (October 1986), pp.
266–288; revised and reprinted as Chapter III of Kant's System of Perspectives  Archived 14 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine : An architectonic interpretation of the Critical philosophy (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993).
^  Kant, CPracR 5:161   ^  Beiser, Frederick C.
(2002).
German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781–1801 .
Part I.
Harvard University Press .
^  Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1827).
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Basic Outline .
Heidelberg.
14–15.
^  Cody, David.
"Carlyle: Sources and Influence" .
The Victorian Web .
Retrieved 28 July 2023 .
^  Schlegel, Friedrich.
"Athenaeum Fragments", in Philosophical Fragments .
Peter Firchow.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1991.
See especially fragments Nos.
1, 43, 44.
^  Greenberg, Clement.
"Modernist Painting", in The Philosophy of Art , ed.
Alex Neill and Aaron Ridley, McGraw-Hill, 1995.
^  See "Essential Works of Foucault: 1954–1984 vol.
2: Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology".
by James Faubion, Trans.
Robert Hurley et al.
New York City: The New Press, 1998 (2010 reprint).
See "Foucault, Michel, 1926 –" entry by Maurice Florence.
^  For a discussion and qualified defense of this position, see Stephen Palmquist, "A Priori Knowledge in Perspective: (I) Mathematics, Method and Pure Intuition", The Review of Metaphysics 41:1 (September 1987), pp.
3–22.
^  Ray, James Lee (1998).
"Does Democracy Cause Peace?"
Annual Review of Political Science .
1 : 27–46.
doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.1.1.27 .
Archived from the original on 17 February 2008.
^  Wendt, Alexander (1999).
Social Theory of International Politics .
chapter 6.
^  Aridi, Sara (14 March 2017).
"Onora O'Neill Wins Holberg Prize for Academic Research" .
Archived from the original on 9 January 2019 .
Retrieved 9 January 2019 .
^  Cassam, Q.
The Possibility of Knowledge Oxford: 2009   ^  Sellars, Wilfrid, Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes .
Ridgeview Publishing Company, 1967   ^  Habermas, J.
(1994): The Unity of Reason in the Diversity of Its Voices.
In: Habermas, J.
(Ed.
): Postmetaphysical Thinking.
Political Essays , Cambridge, Massachusetts: 115–148.
^  Palmquist, Stephen (2010).
Cultivating Personhood: Kant and Asian Philosophy .
Hong Kong: De Gruyter, Inc.
p.
25 .
ISBN  978-3-11-022624-9 .
^  Wing-Cheuk, Chan (21 February 2006).
"Mou Zongsan's Transformation of Kant's Philosophy".
Journal of Chinese Philosophy .
33 (1): 1.
doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6253.2006.00340.x .
^  Balanovskiy, Valentin (2016).
"Whether jung was a kantian?"
Con-Textos Kantianos (4): 118–126.
doi : 10.5281/zenodo.2550828 .
Retrieved 29 May 2020 .
^  Balanovskiy, Valentin (2017).
"Kant and Jung on the prospects of Scientific Psychology" .
Estudos Kantianos .
5 (1): 357–390.
doi : 10.36311/2318-0501.2017.v5n1.26.p375 .
^  Issacson, Walter.
"Einstein: His Life and Universe".
p.
20.
^  Theodora Achourioti & Michiel van Lambalgen, 'A Formalization of Kant's Transcendental Logic', The Review of Symbolic Logic , 4 (2011), 254–289.
^  The thesis was submitted on 17 April 1755.
"The public examination was held four weeks later on 13 May, and the degree was formally awarded on 12 June" (Eric Watkins, Kant: Natural Science , Cambridge University Press, 2012, p.
309).
), Kant and the Sciences , Oxford University Press, 2001, p.
27.
^  Martin Schonfeld, The Philosophy of the Young Kant: The Precritical Project , Oxford University Press, 2000, p.
74.
^  Available online at Bonner Kant-Korpus  Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .
^  The thesis was publicly disputed on 27 September 1755 (Kuehn 2001, p.
100).
^  Kant's application for the position was unsuccessful.
He defended it on 10 April 1756 (Kuehn 2001, p.
102).
^  Available online at Archive.org .
^  Immanuel Kant, "Concerning the ultimate ground of the differentiation of directions in space"  Archived 16 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine .
^  The thesis was publicly disputed on 21 August 1770 (Kuehn 2001, p.
189).
^  Available online at Google Books  Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine .
^  English translation available online at Wikisource .
^  Immanuel Kant.
"The Critique of Pure Reason" .
Etext.library.adelaide.edu.au.
Archived from the original on 2 December 2008 .
"Immanuel Kant: Kritik der reinen Vernunft – 1.
Auflage – Kapitel 1" (in German).
Projekt Gutenberg-DE.
Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 .
^  Frank-Christian Lilienweihs (10 June 1999).
"Immanuel Kant: Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklaerung?"
Prometheusonline.de.
Archived from the original on 1 August 2009 .
^  "Critique of Pure Reason" .
Hkbu.edu.hk.
31 October 2003.
Archived from the original on 27 April 2009 .
^  "Immanuel Kant: Kritik der reinen Vernunft – 2.
20 July 2009.
Archived from the original on 26 December 2005 .
"Immanuel Kant: Kritik der praktischen Vernunft – Kapitel 1" (in German).
^  s:The Critique of Judgment   ^  Immanuel Kant.
"Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone by Immanuel Kant 1793" .
Marxists.org.
Archived from the original on 1 June 2009 .
^  "Immanuel Kant, "Perpetual Peace" " .
Mountr Holyoke.
Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 .
^  "Immanuel Kant: Zum ewigen Frieden, 12.02.2004 (Friedensratschlag)" .
Uni-kassel.de.
Archived from the original on 23 September 2009 .
^  "Kant, The Contest of Faculties" .
Chnm.gmu.edu.
1798.
Archived from the original on 4 August 2011 .
"Immanuel Kant: Der Streit der Facultäten – Kapitel 1" (in German).
^  Available online at DeutschesTextArchiv.de  Archived 10 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .
^  Immanuel Kant, Notes and Fragments , Cambridge University Press, 2005, p.
xvi.
Works cited   Bernasconi, Robert (2010).
"Defining Race Scientifically: A response to Michael Banton".
Ethnicities .
10 (1): 141–148.
doi : 10.1177/14687968100100010802 .
ISSN  1468-7968 .
JSTOR  23890861 .
S2CID  143925406 .
Bouie, Jamelle (5 June 2018).
"How the Enlightenment Created Modern Race Thinking and Why We Should Confront It" .
Slate .
Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 .
Retrieved 15 June 2020 .
Bowersox, Jeff (4 February 2016).
"Kant on the different human races (1777)" .
Black Central Europe .
Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 .
Retrieved 16 June 2020 .
Caygill, Howard (1995).
A Kant Dictionary .
Blackwell Publishing.
Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (1997a).
Wiley.
103–131.
ISBN  978-0-631-20339-1 .
Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (1997b).
Race and the Enlightenment: A Reader .
39–48.
ISBN  978-0-631-20136-6 .
Driver, Julia (2007).
Ethics: The Fundamentals .
ISBN  978-1-4051-1154-6 .
di Giovanni, George (2005).
Freedom and Religion in Kant and His Immediate Successors .
Guyer, Paul (2014).
Kant .
Guyer, Paul; Wood, Alan W.
(1998).
"Introduction to the Critique of Pure Reason ".
The Critique of Pure Reason .
Jankowiak, Tim (2023).
Immanuel Kant .
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .
Retrieved 4 March 2023 .
Johnson, Robert (2008).
"Kant's Moral Philosophy" .
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .
Retrieved 11 September 2013 .
Kant, Immanuel (2010).
"Kant on the Different Races of Man"  (PDF) .
UMass Amherst.
Kleingeld, Pauline (October 2007).
"Kant's Second Thoughts on Race"  (PDF) .
The Philosophical Quarterly .
57 (229): 573–592.
doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9213.2007.498.x .
hdl : 11370/e15b6815-5eab-42d6-a789-24a2f6ecb946 .
S2CID  55185762 .
Archived  (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2019 .
Retrieved 14 December 2020 .
Kuehn, Manfred (2001).
Kant: a Biography .
ISBN  978-0-521-49704-6 .
Mills, Charles W.
(2017).
Black Rights/White Wrongs: The Critique of Racial Liberalism .
doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190245412.001.0001 .
ISBN  978-0-19-024545-0 .
Rohlf, Michael (2020).
Edward N.
Zalta (ed.).
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition).
Schneewind, J.
B.
(2010).
"Autonomy, Obligation, and Virtue: An Overview of Kant's Moral Philosophy".
Essays on the History of Moral Philosophy .
Shrage, Laurie (18 March 2019).
"Should we continue to teach thinkers like Kant, Voltaire and Hume without mention of the harmful prejudices they helped legitimize?"
Retrieved 10 November 2022 .
Stang, Nicholas F.
(2022).
Edward N.
Zalta & Uri Nodelman (ed.).
Kant's Transcendental Idealism .
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2022 Edition).
Wood, Allen (1999).
Kant's Ethical Thought .
ISBN  978-0521648363 .
Wood, Allen (2006).
"Kant's Practical Philosophy".
In Karl Ameriks (ed.).
The Cambridge Companion to German Idealism .
ISBN  978-0801486043 .
Wood, Allen (2008).
Kantian Ethics .
ISBN  978-0521671149 .
External links    Immanuel Kant at Wikipedia's sister projects   Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata  Works by Immanuel Kant at Project Gutenberg  Works by or about Immanuel Kant at Internet Archive  Works by Immanuel Kant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  KantPapers , authors and papers database powered by PhilPapers, focused on Kant, and located at Cornell University  Stephen Palmquist's Glossary of Kantian Terminology  At the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Immanuel Kant: An Overview Aesthetics Logic Metaphysics Philosophy of Mind Philosophy of Religion Radical Evil Transcendental Idealism  At the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Immanuel Kant Kant and Hume on Causality Kant and Hume on Morality Kant's Account of Reason Kant's Aesthetics and Teleology Kant's Critique of Metaphysics Kant's Moral Philosophy Kant's Philosophical Development Kant's Philosophy of Mathematics Kant's Philosophy of Religion Kant's Philosophy of Science Kant's Social and Political Philosophy Kant's Theory of Judgment Kant's Transcendental Arguments Kant's View of the Mind and Consciousness of Self Kant's Views on Space and Time Kantian Conceptualism/Nonconceptualism Leibniz's Influence on Kant Articles related to Immanuel Kant  v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics  Atheism  Capitalism  Civil liberties  Classicism  Counter-Enlightenment  Critical thinking  Deism  Democracy  Empiricism  Encyclopédistes  Enlightened absolutism  Haskalah  Humanism  Human rights  Individualism  Liberalism  Liberté, égalité, fraternité  Lumières  Methodological skepticism  Midlands  Modernity  Natural philosophy  Objectivity  Progressivism  Rationality  Rationalism  Reason  Reductionism  Sapere aude  Science  Scientific method  Spanish America  Universality  Utopianism  Thinkers England  Addison  Ashley-Cooper  Bacon  Bentham  Collins  Gibbon  Godwin  Harrington  Hooke  Johnson  Locke  Milton  Newton  Pope  Price  Priestley  Reynolds  Sidney  Tindal  Wollstonecraft  France  d'Alembert  d'Argenson  Bayle  Beaumarchais  Chamfort  Châtelet  Condillac  Condorcet  Descartes  Diderot  Fontenelle  Gouges  Helvétius  d'Holbach  Jaucourt  La Mettrie  Lavoisier  Leclerc  Mably  Maréchal  Meslier  Montesquieu  Morelly  Pascal  Quesnay  Raynal  Sade  Turgot  Voltaire  Geneva  Abauzit  Bonnet  Burlamaqui  Prévost  Rousseau  Saussure  Germany  Goethe  Herder  Humboldt  Kant  Leibniz  Lessing  Lichtenberg  Mendelssohn  Pufendorf  Schiller  Thomasius  Weishaupt  Wieland  Wolff  Greece  Farmakidis  Feraios  Kairis  Korais  Ireland  Berkeley  Boyle  Burke  Swift  Toland  Italy  Beccaria  Galiani  Galvani  Genovesi  Pagano  Verri  Vico  Netherlands  Bekker  Grotius  Huygens  Leeuwenhoek  Nieuwentyt  Spinoza  Swammerdam  Poland  Kołłątaj  Konarski  Krasicki  Niemcewicz  Poniatowski  Śniadecki  Staszic  Wybicki  Portugal  Carvalho e Melo  Romania  Budai-Deleanu  Maior  Micu-Klein  Șincai  Russia  Catherine II  Fonvizin  Kantemir  Kheraskov  Lomonosov  Novikov  Radishchev  Vorontsova-Dashkova  Serbia  Obradović  Mrazović  Spain  Cadalso  Charles III  Feijóo y Montenegro  Moratín  Jovellanos  Villarroel  Scotland  Beattie  Black  Blair  Boswell  Burnett  Burns  Cullen  Ferguson  Hume  Hutcheson  Hutton  Mill  Newton  Playfair  Reid  Smith  Stewart  United States  Franklin  Jefferson  Madison  Mason  Paine   Romanticism →   Category   v t e Metaphysics Theories  Abstract object theory  Action theory  Anti-realism  Determinism  Dualism  Enactivism  Essentialism  Existentialism  Free will  Idealism  Libertarianism  Liberty  Materialism  Meaning of life  Monism  Naturalism  Nihilism  Phenomenalism  Realism  Physicalism  Relativism  Scientific realism  Solipsism  Spiritualism  Subjectivism  Substance theory  Theory of forms  Truthmaker theory  Type theory  Concepts  Abstract object  Anima mundi  Category of being  Causality  Causal closure  Cogito, ergo sum  Concept  Embodied cognition  Essence  Existence  Experience  Hypostatic abstraction  Idea  Identity  Information  Insight  Intelligence  Intention  Linguistic modality  Matter  Meaning  Mental representation  Mind  Motion  Nature  Necessity  Object  Ontology  Pattern  Perception  Physical object  Principle  Property  Qualia  Quality  Reality  Relation  Soul  Subject  Substantial form  Thought  Time  Truth  Type–token distinction  Universal  Unobservable  Value  more ...
 Metaphysicians  Parmenides  Plato  Aristotle  Proclus  Plotinus  Scotus  Aquinas  Suárez  Descartes  Spinoza  Locke  Malebranche  Newton  Leibniz  Wolff  Reid  Berkeley  Hume  Kant  Hegel  Schopenhauer  Bolzano  Lotze  Peirce  Nietzsche  Meinong  Bergson  Whitehead  Russell  Moore  Collingwood  Wittgenstein  Heidegger  Carnap  Ryle  Sartre  Quine  Davidson  Strawson  Anscombe  Deleuze  Dummett  Armstrong  Putnam  Plantinga  Kripke  Lewis  Parfit  more ...
Notable works  Sophist  (c.
350 BC)  Timaeus  (c.
350 BC)  Nyāya Sūtras  (c.
200 BC)  De rerum natura  (c.
80 BC)  Metaphysics  (c.
50)  Enneads  (c.
270)  Daneshnameh-ye Alai  (c.
1000)  Meditations on First Philosophy  (1641)  Ethics  (1677)  A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge  (1710)  Monadology  (1714)  Critique of Pure Reason  (1781)  Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics  (1783)  The Phenomenology of Spirit  (1807)  The World as Will and Representation  (1818)  Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments  (1846)  Being and Time  (1927)  Being and Nothingness  (1943)  Simulacra and Simulation  (1981)  Related topics  Axiology  Cosmology  Epistemology  Feminist metaphysics  Interpretations of quantum mechanics  Mereology  Meta-  Phenomenology  Philosophy of mind  Philosophy of psychology  Philosophy of self  Philosophy of space and time  Teleology    Category   Philosophy portal   v t e Epistemology Epistemologists  Thomas Aquinas  Augustine of Hippo  William Alston  Robert Audi  A.
J.
Ayer  George Berkeley  Laurence BonJour  Gilles Deleuze  Keith DeRose  René Descartes  John Dewey  Fred Dretske  Edmund Gettier  Alvin Goldman  Nelson Goodman  Paul Grice  Anil Gupta  Susan Haack  David Hume  Immanuel Kant  Søren Kierkegaard  Peter Klein  Saul Kripke  Hilary Kornblith  David Lewis  John Locke  G.
E.
Moore  John McDowell  Robert Nozick  Alvin Plantinga  Plato  Duncan Pritchard  James Pryor  Hilary Putnam  W.
V.
O.
Quine  Thomas Reid  Bertrand Russell  Gilbert Ryle  Wilfrid Sellars  Susanna Siegel  Ernest Sosa  P.
F.
Strawson  Baruch Spinoza  Timothy Williamson  Ludwig Wittgenstein  Nicholas Wolterstorff  Vienna Circle  more...
 Theories  Coherentism  Constructivism  Contextualism  Empiricism  Evolutionary epistemology  Fallibilism  Feminist epistemology  Fideism  Foundationalism  Holism  Infinitism  Innatism  Naïve realism  Naturalized epistemology  Phenomenalism  Positivism  Rationalism  Reductionism  Reliabilism  Representational realism  Skepticism  Transcendental idealism  Concepts  A priori knowledge  A posteriori knowledge  Analysis  Analytic–synthetic distinction  Belief  Common sense  Descriptive knowledge  Exploratory thought  Epistemic injustice  Epistemic virtue  Gettier problem  Induction  Internalism and externalism  Justification  Knowledge  Objectivity  Privileged access  Problem of induction  Problem of other minds  Perception  Procedural knowledge  Proposition  Regress argument  Simplicity  Truth  more...
 Related articles  Outline of epistemology  Faith and rationality  Formal epistemology  Metaepistemology  Philosophy of perception  Philosophy of science  Social epistemology  Virtue epistemology   Category  Task Force  Stubs  Discussion   v t e Social philosophy Concepts  Anomie  Convention  Customs  Cultural heritage  Culturalism  Inter  Mono  Multi  Culture  Counter  Familialism  History  Honour  Human nature  Identity  Formation  Ideology  Institutions  Invisible hand  Loyalty  Modernity  Morality  Public  Mores  National character  Natural law  Reification  Ressentiment  Rights  Sittlichkeit  Social alienation  Social norms  Spontaneous order  Stewardship  Traditions  Values  Family  Volksgeist  Worldview  Schools  Budapest School  Catholic social teaching  Distributism  Communitarianism  Confucianism  Conservatism  Social  Frankfurt School  Personalism  Philosophers Ancient  Augustine  Cicero  Confucius  Lactantius  Laozi  Mencius  Mozi  Origen  Philo  Plato  Plutarch  Polybius  Tertullian  Thucydides  Xunzi  Medieval  Alpharabius  Aquinas  Avempace  Bruni  Dante  Gelasius  Ibn Khaldun  Maimonides  Muhammad  Photios  Plethon  Ibn Tufayl  Early modern  Calvin  Erasmus  Guicciardini  Locke  Luther  Milton  Montaigne  Müntzer  18th and 19th centuries  Arnold  Bentham  Bonald  Burke  Carlyle  Comte  Condorcet  Emerson  Engels  Fichte  Fourier  Franklin  Hegel  Helvétius  Herder  Hume  Jefferson  Kant  Kierkegaard  Le Bon  Le Play  Marx  Mill  Nietzsche  Owen  Renan  Rousseau  Royce  Ruskin  Smith  Spencer  de Staël  Stirner  Taine  Thoreau  Tocqueville  Vico  Vivekananda  Voltaire  20th and 21st centuries  Adorno  Agamben  Arendt  Aron  Badiou  Baudrillard  Bauman  Benoist  Berlin  Butler  Camus  de Beauvoir  Debord  Deleuze  Dewey  Du Bois  Durkheim  Eco  Evola  Foucault  Fromm  Gandhi  Gehlen  Gentile  Gramsci  Guénon  Habermas  Han  Heidegger  Hoppe  Irigaray  Kirk  Kołakowski  Kropotkin  Land  Lasch  MacIntyre  Marcuse  Maritain  Negri  Niebuhr  Nussbaum  Oakeshott  Ortega  Pareto  Polanyi  Radhakrishnan  Röpke  Santayana  Scruton  Shariati  Simmel  Skinner  Sombart  Sowell  Spengler  Taylor  Voegelin  Walzer  Weber  Weil  Zinn  Žižek  Works  De Officiis  (44 BC)  Oration on the Dignity of Man  (1486)  A Vindication of Natural Society  (1756)  Democracy in America  (1835–1840)  Civilization and Its Discontents  (1930)  The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction  (1935)  The Second Sex  (1949)  One-Dimensional Man  (1964)  The Society of the Spectacle  (1967)  The History of Sexuality  (1976)  The Culture of Narcissism  (1979)  A Conflict of Visions  (1987)  The Closing of the American Mind  (1987)  Gender Trouble  (1990)  The Malaise of Modernity  (1991)  Intellectuals and Society  (2010)  See also  Agnotology  Axiology  Critical theory  Cultural criticism  Cultural pessimism  Ethics  Historism  Historicism  Humanities  Philosophy of culture  Philosophy of education  Philosophy of history  Political philosophy  Social criticism  Social science  Social theory  Sociology   Category   v t e Political philosophy Terms  Authority  Citizenship‎  Duty  Elite  Emancipation  Freedom  Government  Hegemony  Hierarchy  Justice  Law  Legitimacy  Liberty  Monopoly  Nation  Obedience  Peace  Pluralism  Power  Progress  Propaganda  Property  Revolution  Rights  Ruling class  Society  Sovereignty‎  State  Utopia  War  Government  Aristocracy  Autocracy  Bureaucracy  Dictatorship  Democracy  Meritocracy  Monarchy  Oligarchy  Plutocracy  Technocracy  Theocracy  Ideologies  Agrarianism  Anarchism  Capitalism  Christian democracy  Colonialism  Communism  Communitarianism  Confucianism  Conservatism  Corporatism  Distributism  Environmentalism  Fascism  Feminism  Feudalism  Imperialism  Islamism  Liberalism  Libertarianism  Localism  Marxism  Monarchism  Multiculturalism  Nationalism  Nazism  Populism  Republicanism  Social Darwinism  Social democracy  Socialism  Third Way  Concepts  Balance of power  Bellum omnium contra omnes  Body politic  Clash of civilizations  Common good  Consent of the governed  Divine right of kings  Family as a model for the state  Monopoly on violence  Natural law  Negative and positive rights  Night-watchman state  Noble lie  Noblesse oblige  Open society  Ordered liberty  Original position  Overton window  Separation of powers  Social contract  State of nature  Statolatry  Tyranny of the majority  Philosophers Ancient  Aristotle  Chanakya  Cicero  Confucius  Han Fei  Lactantius  Mencius  Mozi  Plato  political philosophy  Polybius  Shang  Sun Tzu  Thucydides  Xenophon  Medieval  Alpharabius  Aquinas  Averroes  Bruni  Dante  Gelasius  al-Ghazali  Ibn Khaldun  Marsilius  Muhammad  Nizam al-Mulk  Ockham  Plethon  Wang  Early modern  Boétie  Bodin  Bossuet  Calvin  Campanella  Filmer  Grotius  Guicciardini  Hobbes  political philosophy  James  Leibniz  Locke  Luther  Machiavelli  Milton  More  Müntzer  Pufendorf  Spinoza  Suárez  18th and 19th centuries  Bakunin  Bastiat  Beccaria  Bentham  Bolingbroke  Bonald  Burke  Carlyle  Comte  Condorcet  Constant  Cortés  Engels  Fichte  Fourier  Franklin  Godwin  Haller  Hegel  Herder  Hume  Iqbal  political philosophy  Jefferson  Kant  political philosophy  Le Bon  Le Play  Madison  Maistre  Marx  Mazzini  Mill  Montesquieu  Nietzsche  Owen  Paine  Renan  Rousseau  Sade  Saint-Simon  Smith  Spencer  de Staël  Stirner  Taine  Thoreau  Tocqueville  Tucker  Voltaire  20th and 21st centuries  Agamben  Ambedkar  Arendt  Aron  Badiou  Bauman  Benoist  Berlin  Bernstein  Burnham  Chomsky  Dmowski  Du Bois  Dugin  Dworkin  Evola  Foucault  Fromm  Fukuyama  Gandhi  Gentile  Gramsci  Guénon  Habermas  Hayek  Hoppe  Huntington  Kautsky  Kirk  Kropotkin  Laclau  Lenin  Luxemburg  Mansfield  Mao  Marcuse  Maurras  Michels  Mises  Mosca  Mouffe  Negri  Nozick  Nussbaum  Oakeshott  Ortega  Pareto  Popper  Qutb  Rand  Rawls  Röpke  Rothbard  Russell  Sartre  Schmitt  Scruton  Shariati  Sorel  Spann  Spengler  Strauss  Sun  Taylor  Voegelin  Walzer  Weber  Works  Republic  (c.
375 BC)  Politics  (c.
350 BC)  De re publica  (51 BC)  Treatise on Law  (c.
1274)  Monarchia  (1313)  The Prince  (1532)  Leviathan  (1651)  Two Treatises of Government  (1689)  The Spirit of Law  (1748)  The Social Contract  (1762)  Reflections on the Revolution in France  (1790)  Rights of Man  (1791)  Elements of the Philosophy of Right  (1820)  Democracy in America  (1835–1840)  The Communist Manifesto  (1848)  On Liberty  (1859)  The Revolt of the Masses  (1929)  The Road to Serfdom  (1944)  The Open Society and Its Enemies  (1945)  The Origins of Totalitarianism  (1951)  A Theory of Justice  (1971)  The End of History and the Last Man  (1992)  Related  Authoritarianism  Collectivism and individualism  Conflict theories  Contractualism  Critique of political economy  Egalitarianism  Elite theory  Elitism  Institutional discrimination  Jurisprudence  Justification for the state  Philosophy of law  Political ethics  Political spectrum  Left-wing politics  Centrism  Right-wing politics  Separation of church and state  Separatism  Social justice  Statism  Totalitarianism  Index   Category:Political philosophy   v t e Ethics Normative  Consequentialism  Deontology  Care  Particularism  Pragmatic  Role  Suffering-focused  Utilitarianism  Virtue  Applied  Animal  Artificial intelligence  Bio  Business  Discourse  Engineering  Environmental  Legal  Machine  Meat eating  Media  Medical  Nursing  Professional  Sexual  Technology  Terraforming  Uncertain sentience  Meta  Absolutism  Axiology  Cognitivism  Realism  Naturalism  Non-naturalism  Subjectivism  Ideal observer theory  Divine command theory  Constructivism  Euthyphro dilemma  Intuitionism  Nihilism  Non-cognitivism  Emotivism  Expressivism  Quasi-realism  Universal prescriptivism  Rationalism  Relativism  Skepticism  Universalism  Value monism – Value pluralism  Schools  Buddhist  Christian  Confucian  Epicurean  Existentialist  Feminist  Islamic  Jewish  Kantian  Rousseauian  Stoic  Tao  Concepts  Authority  Autonomy  Common sense  Compassion  Conscience  Consent  Culture of life  Dignity  Double standard  Duty  Equality  Etiquette  Eudaimonia  Family values  Fidelity  Free will  Good and evil  Good  Evil  Problem of evil  Happiness  Honour  Ideal  Immorality  Justice  Liberty  Loyalty  Moral courage  Moral hierarchy  Moral imperative  Morality  Norm  Political freedom  Precept  Rights  Self-discipline  Suffering  Stewardship  Sympathy  Theodicy  Trust  Value  Intrinsic  Japan  Western  Vice  Virtue  Vow  Wrong  Ethicists  Laozi  Socrates  Plato  Aristotle  Diogenes  Valluvar  Cicero  Confucius  Augustine  Mencius  Mozi  Xunzi  Aquinas  Spinoza  Hume  Kant  Hegel  Schopenhauer  Bentham  Mill  Kierkegaard  Sidgwick  Nietzsche  Moore  Barth  Tillich  Bonhoeffer  Foot  Rawls  Dewey  Williams  Mackie  Anscombe  Frankena  MacIntyre  Hare  Singer  Parfit  Nagel  Adams  Taylor  Azurmendi  Korsgaard  Nussbaum  Works  Nicomachean Ethics  (c.
322 BC)  Ethics (Spinoza)  (1677)  A Treatise of Human Nature  (1740)  The Theory of Moral Sentiments  (1759)  Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals  (1785)  Critique of Practical Reason  (1788)  Elements of the Philosophy of Right  (1820)  Either/Or  (1843)  Utilitarianism  (1861)  Beyond Good and Evil  (1886)  On the Genealogy of Morality  (1887)  Principia Ethica  (1903)  Ethics (Moore)  (1912)  A Theory of Justice  (1971)  Animal Liberation  (1975)  Practical Ethics  (1979)  After Virtue  (1981)  Related  Axiology  Casuistry  Descriptive ethics  Ethics in religion  Evolutionary ethics  History of ethics  Ideology  Moral psychology  Philosophy of law  Political philosophy  Population ethics  Secular ethics  Social philosophy  Index    Category   v t e Philosophy of religion Concepts in religion  Afterlife  Euthyphro dilemma  Faith  or religious belief  Intelligent design  Miracle  Problem of evil  Soul  Spirit  Theodicy  Theological veto  Conceptions of God  Brahman  Demiurge  Divine simplicity  Egoism  Holy Spirit  Misotheism  Pandeism  Personal god  Process theology  Supreme Being  Unmoved mover  God in  Abrahamic religions  Buddhism  Christianity  Hinduism  Islam  Jainism  Judaism  Mormonism  Sikhism  Baháʼí Faith  Wicca  Existence of God For  Beauty  Christological  Consciousness  Cosmological  Kalam  Contingency  Degree  Desire  Experience  Fine-tuning of the universe  Love  Miracles  Morality  Necessary existent  Ontological  Pascal's wager  Proper basis and Reformed epistemology  Reason  Teleological  Natural law  Watchmaker analogy  Transcendental  Against  747 gambit  Atheist's Wager  Evil  Free will  Hell  Inconsistent revelations  Nonbelief  Noncognitivism  Occam's razor  Omnipotence  Poor design  Russell's teapot  Theology  Acosmism  Agnosticism  Animism  Antireligion  Atheism  Creationism  Dharmism  Deism  Demonology  Divine command theory  Dualism  Esotericism  Exclusivism  Existentialism  Christian  Atheistic  Feminist theology  Thealogy  Womanist theology  Fideism  Fundamentalism  Gnosticism  Henotheism  Humanism  Religious  Secular  Christian  Inclusivism  Theories about religions  Monism  Monotheism  Mysticism  Naturalism  Metaphysical  Religious  Humanistic  New Age  Nondualism  Nontheism  Pandeism  Panentheism  Pantheism  Perennialism  Polytheism  Possibilianism  Process theology  Religious skepticism  Spiritualism  Shamanism  Taoic  Theism  Transcendentalism  more...
Religious language  Eschatological verification  Language game  Logical positivism  Apophatic theology  Verificationism  Problem of evil  Augustinian theodicy  Best of all possible worlds  Euthyphro dilemma  Inconsistent triad  Irenaean theodicy  Natural evil  Theodicy  Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval  Anselm of Canterbury  Augustine of Hippo  Avicenna  Averroes  Boethius  Gaudapada  Gaunilo of Marmoutiers  Pico della Mirandola  Heraclitus  King James VI and I  Marcion of Sinope  Maimonides  Adi Shankara  Thomas Aquinas  William of Ockham  Early modern  Augustin Calmet  René Descartes  Blaise Pascal  Desiderius Erasmus  Baruch Spinoza  Nicolas Malebranche  Gottfried W Leibniz  William Wollaston  Thomas Chubb  David Hume  Baron d'Holbach  Immanuel Kant  Johann G Herder  1800 1850  Friedrich Schleiermacher  Karl C F Krause  Georg W F Hegel  Thomas Carlyle  William Whewell  Ludwig Feuerbach  Søren Kierkegaard  Karl Marx  Albrecht Ritschl  Afrikan Spir  1880 1900  Ernst Haeckel  W K Clifford  Friedrich Nietzsche  Harald Høffding  William James  Vladimir Solovyov  Ernst Troeltsch  Rudolf Otto  Lev Shestov  Sergei Bulgakov  Pavel Florensky  Ernst Cassirer  Joseph Maréchal  1920 postwar  George Santayana  Bertrand Russell  Martin Buber  René Guénon  Paul Tillich  Karl Barth  Emil Brunner  Rudolf Bultmann  Gabriel Marcel  Reinhold Niebuhr  Charles Hartshorne  Mircea Eliade  Frithjof Schuon  J L Mackie  Walter Kaufmann  Martin Lings  Peter Geach  George I Mavrodes  William Alston  Antony Flew  1970 1990 2010  William L Rowe  Dewi Z Phillips  Alvin Plantinga  Anthony Kenny  Nicholas Wolterstorff  Richard Swinburne  Robert Merrihew Adams  Ravi Zacharias  Peter van Inwagen  Daniel Dennett  Loyal Rue  Jean-Luc Marion  William Lane Craig  Ali Akbar Rashad  Alexander Pruss  Related topics  Criticism of religion  Desacralization of knowledge  Ethics in religion  Exegesis  History of religion  Religion  Religious language  Religious philosophy  Relationship between religion and science  Faith and rationality  more...
   Portal   Category   v t e Aesthetics Areas  Ancient  Africa  India  Internet  Japanese  Mathematics  Medieval  Music  Nature  Science  Theology  Schools  Aestheticism  Classicism  Fascism  Feminism  Formalism  Historicism  Marxism  Modernism  Postmodernism  Psychoanalysis  Realism  Romanticism  Symbolism  Theosophy  more...
 Philosophers  Abhinavagupta  Adorno  Alberti  Aristotle  Aquinas  Balázs  Balthasar  Baudelaire  Baudrillard  Baumgarten  Bell  Benjamin  Burke  Coleridge  Collingwood  Coomaraswamy  Danto  Deleuze  Dewey  Fry  Goethe  Goodman  Greenberg  Hanslick  Hegel  Heidegger  Hume  Hutcheson  Kant  Kierkegaard  Klee  Langer  Lipps  Lukács  Lyotard  Man  Maritain  Merleau-Ponty  Nietzsche  Ortega y Gasset  Pater  Plato  Rancière  Rand  Richards  Ruskin  Santayana  Schiller  Schopenhauer  Scruton  Tagore  Tanizaki  Vasari  Wilde  Winckelmann  more...
 Concepts  Appropriation  Art for art's sake  Art manifesto  Artistic merit  Avant-garde  Beauty  Feminine  Masculine  Camp  Comedy  Creativity  Cuteness  Disgust  Ecstasy  Elegance  Emotions  Entertainment  Eroticism  Fashion  Fun  Gaze  Harmony  Humour  Interpretation  Judgment  Kama  Kitsch  Life imitating art  Magnificence  Mimesis  Perception  Picturesque  Quality  Rasa  Recreation  Reverence  Style  Sublime  Taste  Tragedy  Work of art  Works  Hippias Major  (c.
390 BC)  Poetics  (c.
335 BC)  The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons  (c.
100)  On the Sublime  (c.
500)  A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful  (1757)  Lectures on Aesthetics  (1835)  " The Critic as Artist " (1891)  In Praise of Shadows  (1933)  Art as Experience  (1934)  " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935)  " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939)  Critical Essays  (1946)  The Aesthetic Dimension  (1977)  Why Beauty Matters  (2009)  Related  Aestheticization of politics  Applied aesthetics  Arts criticism  Axiology  Evolutionary aesthetics  Mathematical beauty  Neuroesthetics  Patterns in nature  Philosophy of design  Philosophy of film  Philosophy of music  Psychology of art  Theory of art   Index  Outline  Category   Philosophy portal   v t e Jurisprudence  Index  Legal theory  Critical legal studies  Comparative law  Economic analysis  Legal norms  International legal theory  Legal history  Philosophy of law  Sociology of law  Philosophers  Alexy  Aquinas  Aristotle  Austin  Bastiat  Beccaria  Bentham  Blackstone  Bobbio  Bork  Cardozo  Durkheim  Dworkin  Ehrlich  Finnis  Fuller  Grotius  Gurvitch  Habermas  Haller  Han  Hart  Hegel  Hobbes  Hägerström  Jellinek  Jhering  Kant  Kelsen  Leoni  Llewellyn  Luhmann  Marx  Müller  Nussbaum  Olivecrona  Pashukanis  Perelman  Petrażycki  Posner  Pound  Pufendorf  Radbruch  Rawls  Raz  Reinach  Renner  Ross  Rumi  Savigny  Scaevola  Schmitt  Shang  Suárez  Stahl  Unger  Voegelin  Walzer  Weber  Theories  Analytical jurisprudence  Deontological ethics  Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law  German historical school  Interpretivism  Legal moralism  Legal positivism  Legal realism  Legalism  Libertarian theories of law  Natural law  Paternalism  Utilitarianism  Virtue jurisprudence  Concepts  Dharma  Fa  Judicial interpretation  Justice  Law without the state  Legal system  Li  Question of law  Rational-legal authority  Usul al-Fiqh    Category   Law portal  Philosophy portal   WikiProject Law  WikiProject Philosophy  changes   v t e Liberalism Ideas  Consent of the governed  Due process  Democracy  Economic liberalism  Economic globalization  Equality  Gender  Legal  Federalism  Freedom  Economic  Market  Trade  Press  Religion  Speech  Harm principle  Internationalism  Invisible hand  Labor theory of property  Laissez-faire  Liberty  Negative  Positive  Limited government  Market economy  Natural monopoly  Open society  Permissive society  Popular sovereignty  Property  Private  Public  Rights  Civil and political  Natural and legal  To own property  To bear arms  Rule of law  Secularism  Secular humanism  Separation of church and state  Separation of powers  Social contract  Social justice  Social services  Welfare state  State of nature Schools Classical  Economic  Fiscal  Neo  Equity feminism  Georgist  Radical  Anti-clerical  Civic nationalism  Republican  Utilitarian  Whig  Physiocratic  Encyclopaedist  Conservative  Democratic  Liberal conservatism  National  Ordo  Social  Green  Liberal feminism  Ecofeminism  Liberal socialism  Social democracy  Progressivism  Third Way  Other  Constitutional  Constitutional patriotism  Cultural  Corporate  International  Libertarianism  Left-libertarianism  Geolibertarianism  Neoclassical liberalism  Paleolibertarianism  Right-libertarianism  Radical centrism  Religious  Christian  Islamic  Secular  Techno  By region Africa  Egypt  Nigeria  Senegal  South Africa  Tunisia  Zimbabwe  Asia  China  Hong Kong  India  Iran  Israel  Japan  South Korea  Anti- Chinilpa  Centrist reformist  Progressive  Philippines  Turkey  Europe  Albania  Armenia  Austria  Belgium  Bulgaria  Croatia  Cyprus  Czech lands  Denmark  Estonia  Finland  France  Orléanist  Georgia  Germany  Greece  Hungary  Italy  Berlusconism  Liberism  Latvia  Lithuania  Luxembourg  Macedonia  Moldova  Montenegro  Netherlands  Norway  Portugal  Romania  Russia  Serbia  Slovakia  Slovenia  Spain  Sweden  Switzerland  Turkey  Ukraine  United Kingdom  Gladstonian  Libertarian  Manchester  Muscular  Radical  Whiggist  Latin America and the Caribbean  Bolivia  Brazil  Lulism  Chile  Colombia  Cuba  Ecuador  Honduras  Mexico  Nicaragua  Panama  Paraguay  Peru  Uruguay  North America  Canada  United States  Jacksonian  Jeffersonian  Libertarian  Modern  Progressive  Oceania  Australia  Small-l  New Zealand  Philosophers  Milton  Locke  Spinoza  Montesquieu  Voltaire  Rousseau  Smith  Kant  Turgot  Burke  Priestley  Paine  Beccaria  Condorcet  Bentham  Korais  De Gouges  Wollstonecraft  Staël  Say  Humboldt  Constant  Ricardo  Guizot  List  Bastiat  Martineau  Emerson  Tocqueville  Mill  Spencer  Arnold  Acton  Weber  Hobhouse  Croce  Cassirer  Mises  Ortega  Keynes  Collingwood  Čapek  Hu  Hayek  Popper  Aron  Berlin  Friedman  Rawls  Sen  Nozick  Kymlicka  Badawi Politicians  Jefferson  Kołłątaj  Madison  Artigas  Bolívar  Broglie  Lamartine  Macaulay  Kossuth  Deák  Cobden  Mazzini  Juárez  Lincoln  Gladstone  Cavour  Sarmiento  Mommsen  Naoroji  Itagaki  Levski  Kemal  Deakin  Milyukov  Lloyd George  Venizelos  Ståhlberg  Gokhale  Rathenau  Madero  Einaudi  King  Roosevelt  Pearson  Ohlin  Kennedy  Jenkins Organisations  Africa Liberal Network  Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe  Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party  Arab Liberal Federation  Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats  European Democratic Party  European Liberal Youth  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties  International Federation of Liberal Youth  Liberal International  Liberal Network for Latin America  Liberal parties  Liberal South East European Network  Related topics  Anti-authoritarianism  Anti-communism  Bias in American academia  Bias in the media  Capitalism  Democratic  Centrism  Radical centrism  Economic freedom  Egalitarianism  Empiricism  Humanism  Individualism  Anarchist  Land value tax  Libertarianism  Left  Right  Pirate Party  Sexually liberal feminism  Utilitarianism  Liberalism Portal  Authority control databases  International  FAST  ISNI  VIAF  WorldCat  National  Norway  Chile  Spain  France  BnF data  Argentina  Catalonia  Germany  Italy  Israel  Finland  Belgium  United States  Sweden  Latvia  Japan  Czech Republic  Australia  Greece  Korea  Croatia  Netherlands  Poland  Portugal  Vatican  Academics  CiNii  MathSciNet  Mathematics Genealogy Project  zbMATH  Artists  MusicBrainz  RKD Artists  ULAN  People  Deutsche Biographie  Trove  Other  SNAC  IdRef   Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Immanuel_Kant&oldid=1218908353 "Semantic distinction in philosophy  For the linguistic categories, see Analytic language and Synthetic language .
American philosopher and logician (1908–2000)    Willard Van Orman Quine Quine in 1980 Born ( 1908-06-25 ) June 25, 1908 Akron, Ohio , U.S. Died December 25, 2000 (2000-12-25) (aged 92) Boston , Massachusetts , U.S. Education Oberlin College ( BA ) Harvard University ( PhD ) Spouses   Naomi Clayton  ​  ​ ( m.
1932; div.
1947) ​   Marjorie Boynton  ​  ​ ( m.
1948; died 1998) ​  Awards Rolf Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy  (1993) Kyoto Prize  (1996) Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Mathematical nominalism (1947)  Mathematical quasi-empiricism (1960) Immanent realism  Neopragmatism  Empiricism Anti-foundationalism  Logical behaviorism  Institutions Harvard University Thesis The Logic of Sequences: A Generalization of Principia Mathematica (1932) Doctoral advisor Alfred North Whitehead Other academic advisors C.
I.
Lewis  Doctoral students David Lewis , Gilbert Harman , Dagfinn Føllesdal , Hao Wang , Burton Dreben , Charles Parsons , John Myhill , Robert McNaughton Other notable students Donald Davidson , Daniel Dennett Main interests Logic , ontology , epistemology , philosophy of language , philosophy of mind , philosophy of mathematics , philosophy of science , set theory Notable ideas  List   New Foundations , abstract objects , indeterminacy of translation ( holophrastic indeterminacy , inscrutability of reference , ontological relativity , gavagai ), radical translation , referential transparency , naturalized epistemology , meta-ontology , ontological / ideological commitment ,   natural kind , semantic ascent , Quine's paradox , Duhem–Quine thesis , Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis , semantic holism ( confirmation holism , web of belief , hold come what may ), extensionalism , problem of empty names , propositional attitude , two dogmas of empiricism , principle of charity , cognitive synonymy , observational statement , mathematical quasi-empiricism , Quine–McCluskey algorithm , Quine–Morse set theory , vivid designator , predicate functor logic , Quine quotation , Quine corners , Quine atom , Plato's beard , existential generalization and universal instantiation , veridical vs.
falsidical paradoxes      Willard Van Orman Quine ( / k w aɪ n / ; known to his friends as "Van";  June 25, 1908 – December 25, 2000) was an American philosopher and logician in the analytic tradition , recognized as "one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century".
He served as the Edgar Pierce Chair of Philosophy at Harvard University from 1956 to 1978.
Quine was a teacher of logic and set theory .
Quine was famous for his position that first order logic is the only kind worthy of the name, and developed his own system of mathematics and set theory, known as New Foundations .
In the philosophy of mathematics , he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the Quine–Putnam indispensability argument , an argument for the reality of mathematical entities .
He was the main proponent of the view that philosophy is not conceptual analysis , but continuous with science; the abstract branch of the empirical sciences.
This led to his famous quip that " philosophy of science is philosophy enough".
He led a "systematic attempt to understand science from within the resources of science itself"  and developed an influential naturalized epistemology that tried to provide "an improved scientific explanation of how we have developed elaborate scientific theories on the basis of meager sensory input".
He also advocated ontological relativity in science, known as the Duhem–Quine thesis .
His major writings include the papers "On What There Is" (1948), which elucidated Bertrand Russell 's theory of descriptions and contains Quine's famous dictum of ontological commitment, "To be is to be the value of a variable ", and " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " (1951), which attacked the traditional analytic-synthetic distinction and reductionism, undermining the then-popular logical positivism , advocating instead a form of semantic holism .
They also include the books The Web of Belief (1970), which advocates a kind of coherentism , and Word and Object (1960), which further developed these positions and introduced Quine's famous indeterminacy of translation thesis, advocating a behaviorist  theory of meaning .
Biography   Quine grew up in Akron, Ohio , where he lived with his parents and older brother Robert Cloyd.
His father, Cloyd Robert,  was a manufacturing entrepreneur (founder of the Akron Equipment Company, which produced tire molds)  and his mother, Harriett E., was a schoolteacher and later a housewife .
Quine became an atheist around the age of 9  and remained one for the rest of his life.
Education   Quine received his B.A.
summa cum laude in mathematics from Oberlin College in 1930, and his Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University in 1932.
His thesis supervisor was Alfred North Whitehead .
He was then appointed a Harvard Junior Fellow , which excused him from having to teach for four years.
During the academic year 1932–33, he travelled in Europe thanks to a Sheldon Fellowship, meeting Polish logicians (including Stanislaw Lesniewski and Alfred Tarski ) and members of the Vienna Circle (including Rudolf Carnap ), as well as the logical positivist  A.
J.
Ayer .
It was in Prague that Quine developed a passion for philosophy, thanks to Carnap, whom he defined as his "true and only maître à penser ".
World War II   Quine arranged for Tarski to be invited to the September 1939 Unity of Science Congress in Cambridge, for which the Jewish Tarski sailed on the last ship to leave Danzig before Nazi Germany invaded Poland and triggered World War II .
Tarski survived the war and worked another 44 years in the US.
During the war, Quine lectured on logic in Brazil , in Portuguese, and served in the United States Navy in a military intelligence role, deciphering messages from German submarines, and reaching the rank of lieutenant commander.
Quine could lecture in French, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish as well as his native English.
Personal   He had four children by two marriages.
Guitarist Robert Quine was his nephew.
Quine was politically conservative, but the bulk of his writing was in technical areas of philosophy removed from direct political issues.
He did, however, write in defense of several conservative positions: for example, he wrote in defense of moral censorship ;  while, in his autobiography, he made some criticisms of American postwar academics.
Harvard   At Harvard, Quine helped supervise the Harvard graduate theses of, among others, David Lewis , Gilbert Harman , Dagfinn Føllesdal , Hao Wang , Hugues LeBlanc , Henry Hiz and George Myro .
For the academic year 1964–1965, Quine was a fellow on the faculty in the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University .
In 1980
Quine received an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Humanities at Uppsala University , Sweden.
Quine's student Dagfinn Føllesdal noted that Quine suffered from memory loss towards his final years.
The deterioration of his short-term memory was so severe that he struggled to continue following arguments.
Quine also had considerable difficulty in his project to make the desired revisions to Word and Object .
Before passing away, Quine noted to Morton White : "I do not remember what my illness is called, Althusser or Alzheimer , but since I cannot remember it, it must be Alzheimer."
He died from the illness on Christmas Day in 2000.
Work   Quine's Ph.D. thesis and early publications were on formal logic and set theory .
Only after World War II did he, by virtue of seminal papers on ontology , epistemology and language, emerge as a major philosopher.
By the 1960s, he had worked out his " naturalized epistemology " whose aim was to answer all substantive questions of knowledge and meaning using the methods and tools of the natural sciences.
Quine roundly rejected the notion that there should be a "first philosophy", a theoretical standpoint somehow prior to natural science and capable of justifying it.
These views are intrinsic to his naturalism .
Like the majority of analytic philosophers, who were mostly interested in systematic thinking, Quine evinced little interest in the philosophical canon : only once did he teach a course in the history of philosophy, on David Hume , in 1946.
Logic   Over the course of his career, Quine published numerous technical and expository papers on formal logic, some of which are reprinted in his Selected Logic Papers and in The Ways of Paradox .
His most well-known collection of papers is From A Logical Point of View .
Quine confined logic to classical bivalent first-order logic , hence to truth and falsity under any (nonempty) universe of discourse .
Hence the following were not logic for Quine:  Higher-order logic and set theory.
He referred to higher-order logic as "set theory in disguise";  Much of what Principia Mathematica included in logic was not logic for Quine.
Formal systems involving intensional notions, especially modality .
Quine was especially hostile to modal logic with quantification , a battle he largely lost when Saul Kripke 's relational semantics became canonical for modal logics .
Quine wrote three undergraduate texts on formal logic:  Elementary Logic .
While teaching an introductory course in 1940, Quine discovered that extant texts for philosophy students did not do justice to quantification theory or first-order predicate logic .
Quine wrote this book in 6 weeks as an ad hoc solution to his teaching needs.
Methods of Logic .
The four editions of this book resulted from a more advanced undergraduate course in logic Quine taught from the end of World War II until his 1978 retirement.
Philosophy of Logic .
A concise and witty undergraduate treatment of a number of Quinian themes, such as the prevalence of use-mention confusions, the dubiousness of quantified modal logic , and the non-logical character of higher-order logic.
Mathematical Logic is based on Quine's graduate teaching during the 1930s and 1940s.
It shows that much of what Principia Mathematica took more than 1000 pages to say can be said in 250 pages.
The proofs are concise, even cryptic.
The last chapter, on Gödel's incompleteness theorem and Tarski's indefinability theorem , along with the article Quine (1946), became a launching point for Raymond Smullyan 's later lucid exposition of these and related results.
Quine's work in logic gradually became dated in some respects.
Techniques he did not teach and discuss include analytic tableaux , recursive functions , and model theory .
His treatment of metalogic left something to be desired.
For example, Mathematical Logic does not include any proofs of soundness and completeness .
Early in his career, the notation of his writings on logic was often idiosyncratic.
His later writings nearly always employed the now-dated notation of Principia Mathematica .
Set against all this are the simplicity of his preferred method (as exposited in his Methods of Logic ) for determining the satisfiability of quantified formulas, the richness of his philosophical and linguistic insights, and the fine prose in which he expressed them.
Most of Quine's original work in formal logic from 1960 onwards was on variants of his predicate functor logic , one of several ways that have been proposed for doing logic without quantifiers .
For a comprehensive treatment of predicate functor logic and its history, see Quine (1976).
For an introduction, see ch.
45 of his Methods of Logic .
Quine was very warm to the possibility that formal logic would eventually be applied outside of philosophy and mathematics.
He wrote several papers on the sort of Boolean algebra employed in electrical engineering , and with Edward J.
McCluskey , devised the Quine–McCluskey algorithm of reducing Boolean equations to a minimum covering sum of prime implicants .
Set theory   While his contributions to logic include elegant expositions and a number of technical results, it is in set theory that Quine was most innovative.
He always maintained that mathematics required set theory and that set theory was quite distinct from logic.
He flirted with Nelson Goodman 's nominalism for a while  but backed away when he failed to find a nominalist grounding of mathematics.
Over the course of his career, Quine proposed three axiomatic set theories.
New Foundations , NF, creates and manipulates sets using a single axiom schema for set admissibility, namely an axiom schema of stratified comprehension, whereby all individuals satisfying a stratified formula compose a set.
A stratified formula is one that type theory would allow, were the ontology to include types.
However, Quine's set theory does not feature types.
The metamathematics of NF are curious.
NF allows many "large" sets the now-canonical ZFC set theory does not allow, even sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold.
Since the axiom of choice holds for all finite sets, the failure of this axiom in NF proves that NF includes infinite sets.
The consistency of NF relative to other formal systems adequate for mathematics is an open question, albeit that a number of candidate proofs are current in the NF community suggesting that NF is equiconsistent with Zermelo set theory without Choice.
A modification of NF, NFU , due to R.
B.
Jensen and admitting urelements (entities that can be members of sets but that lack elements), turns out to be consistent relative to Peano arithmetic , thus vindicating the intuition behind NF.
NF and NFU are the only Quinean set theories with a following.
For a derivation of foundational mathematics in NF, see Rosser (1952);  The set theory of Mathematical Logic is NF augmented by the proper classes of von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory , except axiomatized in a much simpler way;  The set theory of Set Theory and Its Logic does away with stratification and is almost entirely derived from a single axiom schema.
Quine derived the foundations of mathematics once again.
This book includes the definitive exposition of Quine's theory of virtual sets and relations, and surveyed axiomatic set theory as it stood circa 1960.
All three set theories admit a universal class, but since they are free of any hierarchy of types , they have no need for a distinct universal class at each type level.
Quine's set theory and its background logic were driven by a desire to minimize posits; each innovation is pushed as far as it can be pushed before further innovations are introduced.
For Quine, there is but one connective, the Sheffer stroke , and one quantifier, the universal quantifier .
All polyadic predicates can be reduced to one dyadic predicate, interpretable as set membership.
His rules of proof were limited to modus ponens and substitution.
He preferred conjunction to either disjunction or the conditional , because conjunction has the least semantic ambiguity.
He was delighted to discover early in his career that all of first order logic and set theory could be grounded in a mere two primitive notions: abstraction and inclusion .
For an elegant introduction to the parsimony of Quine's approach to logic, see his "New Foundations for Mathematical Logic", ch.
5 in his From a Logical Point of View .
Metaphysics   Quine has had numerous influences on contemporary metaphysics .
He coined the term " abstract object ".
He also, in his famous essay On What There is , coined the term " Plato's beard " to refer to the problem of empty names : Suppose now that two philosophers, McX and I, differ over ontology .
Suppose McX maintains there is something which I maintain there is not.
McX can, quite consistently with his own point of view, describe our difference of opinion by saying that I refuse to recognize certain entities...When I try to formulate our difference of opinion, on the other hand, I seem to be in a predicament.
I cannot admit that there are some things which McX countenances and I do not, for in admitting that there are such things I should be contradicting my own rejection of them...This is the old Platonic riddle of nonbeing.
Nonbeing must in some sense be, otherwise what is it that there is not?
This tangled doctrine might be nicknamed Plato's beard : historically it has proved tough, frequently dulling the edge of Occam’s razor.
Quine was unsympathetic, however, to the claim that saying 'X does not exist' is a tacit acceptance of X's existence and, thus, a contradiction.
Appealing to Bertrand Russell and his theory of "singular descriptions", Quine explains how Russell was able to make sense of "complex descriptive names" ('The Present King of France', 'The author of Waverly was a poet', etc.)
by thinking about them as merely "fragments of the whole sentences".
For example, 'The author of Waverly was a poet' becomes 'some thing is such that it is the author of Waverly and was a poet and nothing else is such that it is the author of Waverly' .
Using this sort of analysis with the word ' Pegasus ' (that which Quine is wanting to assert does not exist), he turns Pegasus into a description.
Turning the word 'Pegasus' into a description is to turn 'Pegasus' into a predicate, to use a term of First-order logic : i.e.
a property.
As such, when we say 'Pegasus', we are really saying 'the thing that is Pegasus' or 'the thing that Pegasizes' .
This introduces, to use another term from logic, bound variables (ex: 'everything', 'something,' etc.)
As Quine explains, bound variables, "far from purpoting to be names specifically...do not purport to be names at all: they refer to entities generally, with a kind of studied ambiguity peculiar to themselves."
Putting it another way, to say 'I hate everything' is a very different statement than saying 'I hate Bertrand Russell', because the words 'Bertrand Russell' are a proper name that refer to a very specific person.
Whereas the word 'everything' is a placeholder.
It does not refer to a specific entity or entities.
Quine is able, therefore, to make a meaningful claim about Pegasus' nonexistence for the simple reason that the placeholder (a thing) happens to be empty.
It just so happens that the world does not contain a thing that is such that it is winged and it is a horse.
Rejection of the analytic–synthetic distinction   See also: Two Dogmas of Empiricism  In the 1930s and 40s, discussions with Rudolf Carnap , Nelson Goodman and Alfred Tarski , among others, led Quine to doubt the tenability of the distinction between "analytic" statements  —those true simply by the meanings of their words, such as "No bachelor is married"— and "synthetic" statements, those true or false by virtue of facts about the world, such as "There is a cat on the mat."
This distinction was central to logical positivism .
Although Quine is not normally associated with verificationism , some philosophers believe the tenet is not incompatible with his general philosophy of language, citing his Harvard colleague B.
F.
Skinner and his analysis of language in Verbal Behavior .
But Quine believes, with all due respect to his "great friend"  Skinner, that the ultimate reason is to be found in neurology and not in behavior.
For him, behavioral criteria establish only the terms of the problem, the solution of which, however, lies in neurology .
Like other analytic philosophers before him, Quine accepted the definition of "analytic" as "true in virtue of meaning alone".
Unlike them, however, he concluded that ultimately the definition was circular .
In other words, Quine accepted that analytic statements are those that are true by definition, then argued that the notion of truth by definition was unsatisfactory.
Quine's chief objection to analyticity is with the notion of cognitive synonymy (sameness of meaning).
He argues that analytical sentences are typically divided into two kinds; sentences that are clearly logically true (e.g.
"no unmarried man is married") and the more dubious ones; sentences like "no bachelor is married".
Previously it was thought that if you can prove that there is synonymity between "unmarried man" and "bachelor", you have proved that both sentences are logically true and therefore self evident.
Quine however gives several arguments for why this is not possible, for instance that "bachelor" in some contexts mean a Bachelor of Arts , not an unmarried man.
Confirmation holism and ontological relativity   Colleague Hilary Putnam called Quine's indeterminacy of translation thesis "the most fascinating and the most discussed philosophical argument since Kant 's Transcendental Deduction of the Categories ".
The central theses underlying it are ontological relativity and the related doctrine of confirmation holism .
The premise of confirmation holism is that all theories (and the propositions derived from them) are under-determined by empirical data (data, sensory-data , evidence); although some theories are not justifiable, failing to fit with the data or being unworkably complex, there are many equally justifiable alternatives.
While the Greeks ' assumption that (unobservable) Homeric gods exist is false, and our supposition of (unobservable) electromagnetic waves is true, both are to be justified solely by their ability to explain our observations.
The gavagai  thought experiment tells about a linguist, who tries to find out, what the expression gavagai means, when uttered by a speaker of a yet unknown, native language upon seeing a rabbit.
At first glance, it seems that gavagai simply translates with rabbit .
Now, Quine points out that the background language and its referring devices might fool the linguist here, because he is misled in a sense that he always makes direct comparisons between the foreign language and his own.
However, when shouting gavagai , and pointing at a rabbit, the natives could as well refer to something like undetached rabbit-parts , or rabbit- tropes and it would not make any observable difference.
The behavioural data the linguist could collect from the native speaker would be the same in every case, or to reword it, several translation hypotheses could be built on the same sensoric stimuli.
Quine concluded his " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " as follows:   As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a tool, ultimately, for predicting future experience in the light of past experience.
Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient intermediaries not by definition in terms of experience, but simply as irreducible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer ….
For my part I do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in Homer's gods; and I consider it a scientific error to believe otherwise.
But in point of epistemological footing, the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind.
Both sorts of entities enter our conceptions only as cultural posits.
Quine's ontological relativism (evident in the passage above) led him to agree with Pierre Duhem that for any collection of empirical evidence , there would always be many theories able to account for it, known as the Duhem–Quine thesis .
However, Duhem's holism is much more restricted and limited than Quine's.
For Duhem, underdetermination applies only to physics or possibly to natural science , while for Quine it applies to all of human knowledge.
Thus, while it is possible to verify or falsify whole theories, it is not possible to verify or falsify individual statements.
Almost any particular statement can be saved, given sufficiently radical modifications of the containing theory.
For Quine, scientific thought forms a coherent web in which any part could be altered in the light of empirical evidence, and in which no empirical evidence could force the revision of a given part.
Existence and its contrary   The problem of non-referring names is an old puzzle in philosophy, which Quine captured when he wrote,  A curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicity.
It can be put into three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables: 'What is there?'
It can be answered, moreover, in a word—'Everything'—and everyone will accept this answer as true.
More directly, the controversy goes:   How can we talk about Pegasus ?
To what does the word 'Pegasus' refer?
If our answer is, 'Something', then we seem to believe in mystical entities; if our answer is, 'nothing', then we seem to talk about nothing and what sense can be made of this?
Certainly when we said that Pegasus was a mythological winged horse we make sense, and moreover we speak the truth!
If we speak the truth, this must be truth about something .
So we cannot be speaking of nothing.
Quine resists the temptation to say that non-referring terms are meaningless for reasons made clear above.
Instead he tells us that we must first determine whether our terms refer or not before we know the proper way to understand them.
However, Czesław Lejewski criticizes this belief for reducing the matter to empirical discovery when it seems we should have a formal distinction between referring and non-referring terms or elements of our domain.
Lejewski writes further:   This state of affairs does not seem to be very satisfactory.
The idea that some of our rules of inference should depend on empirical information, which may not be forthcoming, is so foreign to the character of logical inquiry that a thorough re-examination of the two inferences  may prove worth our while.
Lejewski then goes on to offer a description of free logic , which he claims accommodates an answer to the problem.
Lejewski also points out that free logic additionally can handle the problem of the empty set for statements like     ∀  x   F  x  →  ∃  x   F  x    {\displaystyle \forall x\,Fx\rightarrow \exists x\,Fx}   .
Quine had considered the problem of the empty set unrealistic, which left Lejewski unsatisfied.
Ontological commitment   The notion of ontological commitment plays a central role in Quine's contributions to ontology.
A theory is ontologically committed to an entity if that entity must exist in order for the theory to be true.
Quine proposed that the best way to determine this is by translating the theory in question into first-order predicate logic .
Of special interest in this translation are the logical constants known as existential quantifiers (' ∃ '), whose meaning corresponds to expressions like "there exists..." or "for some...".
They are used to bind the variables in the expression following the quantifier.
The ontological commitments of the theory then correspond to the variables bound by existential quantifiers.
For example, the sentence "There are electrons" could be translated as " ∃ x  Electron ( x ) ", in which the bound variable x ranges over electrons, resulting in an ontological commitment to electrons.
This approach is summed up by Quine's famous dictum that "o be is to be the value of a variable".
Quine applied this method to various traditional disputes in ontology.
For example, he reasoned from the sentence "There are prime numbers between 1000 and 1010" to an ontological commitment to the existence of numbers, i.e.
realism about numbers.
This method by itself is not sufficient for ontology since it depends on a theory in order to result in ontological commitments.
Quine proposed that we should base our ontology on our best scientific theory.
Various followers of Quine's method chose to apply it to different fields, for example to "everyday conceptions expressed in natural language".
Indispensability argument for mathematical realism   In philosophy of mathematics , he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis , an argument for the reality of mathematical entities .
Epistemology   Just as he challenged the dominant analytic–synthetic distinction, Quine also took aim at traditional normative  epistemology .
According to Quine, traditional epistemology tried to justify the sciences, but this effort (as exemplified by Rudolf Carnap ) failed, and so we should replace traditional epistemology with an empirical study of what sensory inputs produce what theoretical outputs:    Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psychology and hence of natural science.
It studies a natural phenomenon, viz., a physical human subject.
This human subject is accorded a certain experimentally controlled input—certain patterns of irradiation in assorted frequencies, for instance—and in the fullness of time the subject delivers as output a description of the three-dimensional external world and its history.
The relation between the meager input and the torrential output is a relation that we are prompted to study for somewhat the same reasons that always prompted epistemology: namely, in order to see how evidence relates to theory, and in what ways one's theory of nature transcends any available evidence...
But a conspicuous difference between old epistemology and the epistemological enterprise in this new psychological setting is that we can now make free use of empirical psychology.
As previously reported, in other occasions Quine used the term "neurology" instead of "empirical psychology".
Quine's proposal is controversial among contemporary philosophers and has several critics, with Jaegwon Kim the most prominent among them.
In popular culture   A computer program whose output is its own source code is called a " quine " after Quine.
This usage was introduced by Douglas Hofstadter in his 1979 book, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid .
Quine is a recurring character in the webcomic " Existential Comics ".
Quine was selected for inclusion in the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry 's "Pantheon of Skeptics", which celebrates contributors to the cause of scientific skepticism .
Bibliography   Selected books   1934 A System of Logistic .
Harvard Univ.
Press.
1951 (1940).
Mathematical Logic .
ISBN  0-674-55451-5 .
1980 (1941).
Elementary Logic .
ISBN  0-674-24451-6 .
1982 (1950).
1980 (1953).
From a Logical Point of View .
ISBN  0-674-32351-3 .
Contains " Two dogmas of Empiricism.
"
1960 Word and Object .
MIT Press; ISBN  0-262-67001-1 .
The closest thing Quine wrote to a philosophical treatise.
Ch.
2 sets out the indeterminacy of translation thesis.
1969 (1963).
Set Theory and Its Logic .
1966.
Selected Logic Papers .
New York: Random House.
1976 (1966).
The Ways of Paradox .
1969 Ontological Relativity and Other Essays .
Columbia Univ.
ISBN  0-231-08357-2 .
Contains chapters on ontological relativity , naturalized epistemology , and natural kinds .
1970 (2nd ed., 1978).
With J.
S.
Ullian.
The Web of Belief .
1986 (1970).
The Philosophy of Logic .
1974 (1971).
The Roots of Reference .
Open Court Publishing Company ISBN  0-8126-9101-6 (developed from Quine's Carus Lectures ).
1981.
Theories and Things .
1985.
The Time of My Life: An Autobiography .
Cambridge, The MIT Press.
ISBN  0-262-17003-5 .
1987.
Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary .
ISBN  0-14-012522-1 .
A work of essays, many subtly humorous, for lay readers, very revealing of the breadth of his interests.
1992 (1990).
Pursuit of Truth .
A short, lively synthesis of his thought for advanced students and general readers not fooled by its simplicity.
ISBN  0-674-73951-5 .
1995.
From Stimulus to Science .
ISBN  0-674-32635-0 .
2004.
Quintessence: Basic Readings from the Philosophy of W V Quine .
2008.
Confessions of a Confirmed Extensionalist and Other Essays .
Important articles   1946, "Concatenation as a basis for arithmetic".
Reprinted in his Selected Logic Papers .
1948, " On What There Is ", Review of Metaphysics  2 (5) ( JSTOR ).
Reprinted in his 1953 From a Logical Point of View .
1951, " Two Dogmas of Empiricism ", The Philosophical Review  60 : 20–43.
1956, "Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes", Journal of Philosophy  53 .
Reprinted in his 1976 Ways of Paradox .
Press: 185–196.
1969, "Epistemology Naturalized" in Ontological Relativity and Other Essays .
New York: Columbia University Press: 69–90.
"Truth by Convention", first published in 1936.
Reprinted in the book, Readings in Philosophical Analysis , edited by Herbert Feigl and Wilfrid Sellars , pp.
250–273, Appleton-Century-Crofts , 1949.
Filmography   Bryan Magee (host), Men of Ideas : "The Ideas of Quine", BBC, 1978.
Rudolf Fara (host), In conversation: W.
V.
Quine (7 videocassettes), Philosophy International, Centre for Philosophy of the Natural and Social Sciences, London School of Economics , 1994.
1951 philosophy article by Willard Van Orman Quine  " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " is a paper by analytic philosopher Willard Van Orman Quine published in 1951.
According to University of Sydney professor of philosophy Peter Godfrey-Smith , this "paper  sometimes regarded as the most important in all of twentieth-century philosophy ".
The paper is an attack on two central aspects of the logical positivists' philosophy: the first being the analytic–synthetic distinction between analytic  truths and synthetic truths, explained by Quine as truths grounded only in meanings and independent of facts, and truths grounded in facts; the other being reductionism , the theory that each meaningful statement gets its meaning from some logical construction of terms that refer exclusively to immediate experience.
"Two Dogmas" has six sections.
The first four focus on analyticity, the last two on reductionism.
There, Quine turns the focus to the logical positivists' theory of meaning.
He also presents his own holistic theory of meaning.
Analyticity and circularity   Most of Quine's argument against analyticity in the first four sections is focused on showing that different explanations of analyticity are circular.
The main purpose is to show that no satisfactory explanation of analyticity has been given.
Quine begins by making a distinction between two different classes of analytic statements.
The first one is called logically true and has the form:  (1) No unmarried man is married.
A sentence with that form is true independent of the interpretation of "man" and "married", so long as the logical particles "no", "un-" and "is" have their ordinary English meaning.
The statements in the second class have the form:  (2) No bachelor is married.
A statement with this form can be turned into a statement with form (1) by exchanging synonyms with synonyms, in this case "bachelor" with "unmarried man".
It is the second class of statements that lack characterization according to Quine.
The notion of the second form of analyticity leans on the notion of synonymy, which Quine believes is in as much need of clarification as analyticity.
Most of Quine's following arguments are focused on showing how explanations of synonymy end up being dependent on the notions of analyticity, necessity, or even synonymy itself.
How do we reduce sentences from the second class to a sentence of the first class?
Some might propose definitions .
"No bachelor is married" can be turned into "No unmarried man is married" because "bachelor" is defined as "unmarried man".
But, Quine asks: how do we find out that "bachelor" is defined as "unmarried man"?
Clearly, a dictionary would not solve the problem, as a dictionary is a report of already known synonyms, and thus is dependent on the notion of synonymy, which Quine holds as unexplained.
A second suggestion Quine considers is an explanation of synonymy in terms of interchangeability.
Two linguistic forms are (according to this view) synonymous if they are interchangeable  in all contexts without changing the truth-value .
But consider the following example:  (3) "Bachelor" has fewer than ten letters.
Obviously "bachelor" and "unmarried man" are not interchangeable in that sentence.
To exclude that example and some other obvious counterexamples, such as poetic quality, Quine introduces the notion of cognitive synonymy .
But does interchangeability hold as an explanation of cognitive synonymy?
Suppose we have a language without modal adverbs like "necessarily".
Such a language would be extensional , in the way that two predicates which are true about the same objects are interchangeable again without altering the truth-value.
Thus, there is no assurance that two terms that are interchangeable without the truth-value changing are interchangeable because of meaning, and not because of chance.
For example, "creature with a heart" and "creature with kidneys" share extension.
In a language with the modal adverb "necessarily" the problem is solved, as salva veritate holds in the following case:  (4) Necessarily all and only bachelors are unmarried men  while it does not hold for  (5) Necessarily all and only creatures with a heart are creatures with kidneys.
Presuming that 'creature with a heart' and 'creature with kidneys' have the same extension, they will be interchangeable salva veritate .
But this interchangeability rests upon both empirical features of the language itself and the degree to which extension is empirically found to be identical for the two concepts, and not upon the sought for principle of cognitive synonymy.
It seems that the only way to assert the synonymy is by supposing that the terms 'bachelor' and 'unmarried man' are synonymous and that the sentence "All and only all bachelors are unmarried men" is analytic.
But for salva veritate to hold as a definition of something more than extensional agreement, i.e., cognitive synonymy, we need a notion of necessity and thus of analyticity.
So, from the above example, it can be seen that in order for us to distinguish between analytic and synthetic we must appeal to synonymy; at the same time, we should also understand synonymy with interchangeability salva veritate .
However, such a condition to understand synonymy is not enough so we not only argue that the terms should be interchangeable, but necessarily so.
And to explain this logical necessity we must appeal to analyticity once again.
Thus, the argument is circular, and fails.
Ultimately, Quine reaches the conclusion about analyticity the paper is famous for:  "It is obvious that truth in general depends on both language and extralinguistic fact...
Hence the temptation to suppose in general that the truth of a statement is somehow analyzable into a linguistic component and a factual component.
That there is such a distinction to be drawn at all is an unempirical dogma of empiricists, a metaphysical article of faith."
Reductionism   Analyticity would be acceptable if we allowed for the verification theory of meaning: an analytic statement would be one synonymous with a logical truth , which would be an extreme case of meaning where empirical verification is not needed, because it is "confirmed no matter what".
"So, if the verification theory can be accepted as an adequate account of statement synonymy, the notion of analyticity is saved after all."
The problem that naturally follows is how statements are to be verified.
An empiricist would say that it can only be done using empirical evidence .
So some form of reductionism - "the belief that each meaningful statement is equivalent to some logical construct upon terms which refer to immediate experience" - must be assumed in order for an empiricist to 'save' the notion of analyticity.
Such reductionism, says Quine, presents just as intractable a problem as did analyticity.
In order to prove that all meaningful statements can be translated into a sense-datum language, a reductionist would surely have to confront "the task of specifying a sense-datum language and showing how to translate the rest of significant discourse, statement by statement, into it."
To illustrate the difficulty of doing so, Quine describes Rudolf Carnap 's attempt in his book Der logische Aufbau der Welt .
Quine first observes that Carnap's starting point was not the strictest possible, as his "sense-datum language" included not only sense-events but also "the notations of logic, up through higher set theory...
Empiricists there are who would boggle at such prodigality."
Nonetheless, says Quine, Carnap showed great ingenuity in defining sensory concepts "which, but for his constructions, one would not have dreamed were definable on so slender a basis."
However, even such admirable efforts left Carnap, by his own admission, far short of completing the whole project.
Finally, Quine objects in principle to Carnap's proposed translation of statements like "quality q is at point-instant x;y;z;t" into his sense-datum language, because he does not define the connective "is at".
Without statements of this kind, it is difficult to see, even in principle, how Carnap's project could have been completed.
The difficulty that Carnap encountered shows that reductionism is, at best, unproven and very difficult to prove.
Until a reductionist can produce an acceptable proof, Quine maintains that reductionism is another "metaphysical article of faith".
Quine's holism   See also: Confirmation holism  Instead of reductionism, Quine proposes that it is the whole field of science and not single statements that are verified.
All scientific statements are interconnected.
Logical laws give the relation between different statements, while they also are statements of the system.
This makes talk about the empirical content of a single statement misleading.
It also becomes impossible to draw a line between synthetic statements, which depend on experience, and analytic statements, that hold come what may .
Any statement can be held as necessarily true according to Quine, if the right changes are made somewhere else in the system.
In the same way, no statements are immune to revision.
Even logical laws can be revised according to Quine.
Quantum logic , introduced by Garrett Birkhoff and John von Neumann , abandons the law of distributivity from classical logic in order to reconcile some of the apparent inconsistencies of classical Boolean logic with the facts related to measurement and observation in quantum mechanics .
He states also that a revision of the law of excluded middle has been proposed as a means of simplifying quantum mechanics.
Quine makes the case that the empirical study of physics has furnished apparently credible grounds for replacing classical logic by quantum logic, rather as Newtonian physics gave way to Einsteinian physics .
The idea that logical laws are not immune to revision in the light of empirical evidence has provoked an intense debate (see " Is Logic Empirical?
").
According to Quine, there are two different results of his reasoning.
The first is a blurring of the line between metaphysics and natural science.
The common-sense theory about physical objects is epistemologically comparable to the gods of Homer .
Quine is a physicalist , in the sense that he considers it a scientific error not to adopt a theory which makes reference to physical objects.
However, like Gods of Homer , physical objects are posits, and there is no great epistemic difference in kind; the difference is rather that the theory of physical objects has turned out to be a more efficient theory.
After having defined himself an "empiricist", Quine states in Two Dogmas : "The myth of physical objects is epistemologically superior to most in that it has proved more efficacious than other myths as a device for working a manageable structure into the flux of
experience".
The second result is a move towards pragmatism .
Since, Quine says, the function of science is to predict future experiences in the light of past ones, the only ground for choosing which  explanations to believe is "the degree to which they expedite our dealings with sense experiences ."
While pragmatic concerns are important for Carnap and other logical positivists when choosing a linguistic framework, their pragmatism "leaves off at the imagined boundary between the analytic and the synthetic".
For Quine, every change in the system of science is, when rational , pragmatic.
Critique and influence   Rudolf Carnap prepared a reply entitled "Quine on Analyticity", but this was not published until 1990.
Addressing Quine's concern over the status of the sentence "Everything green is extended", Carnap wrote "the difficulty here lies in the unclarity of the word 'green', namely in an indecision over whether one should use the word for something unextended, i.e., for a single space-time point.
In daily life it is never so used, and one scarcely ever speaks of space-time points."
Carnap then puts forward that an exact artificial language ought to clarify the problem by defining 'green' (or its synonym) as something that is either necessarily or contingently not applied to space-time points.
He wrote that once that decision is made, the difficulty is resolved.
Carnap also answers Quine's argument on the use of sets of formal sentences to explain analyticity by arguing that this method is an explication of a poorly understood notion.
Paul Grice and P.
F.
Strawson criticized Two Dogmas in their (1956) article In Defense of a Dogma .
In Two Dogmas' revisited , Hilary Putnam argues that Quine is attacking two different notions.
Analytic truth defined as a true statement derivable from a tautology by putting synonyms for synonyms is near Kant's account of analytic truth as a truth whose negation is a contradiction.
Analytic truth defined as a truth confirmed no matter what however, is closer to one of the traditional accounts of a priori .
While the first four sections of Quine's paper concern analyticity, the last two concern apriority.
Putnam considers the argument in the two last sections as independent of the first four, and at the same time as Putnam criticizes Quine, he also emphasizes his historical importance as the first top rank philosopher to both reject the notion of apriority and sketch a methodology without it.
Jerrold Katz countered the arguments of Two Dogmas directly by trying to define analyticity non-circularly on the syntactical features of sentences.
In his book Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century, Volume 1 : The Dawn of Analysis  Scott Soames (pp.
360–361) has pointed out that Quine's circularity argument needs two of the logical positivists' central theses to be effective:  All necessary truths (and all a priori truths) are analytic  Analyticity is needed to explain and legitimate necessity.
According to Soames, both theses were accepted by most philosophers when Quine published Two Dogmas .
Today however, Soames holds both statements to be antiquated.
Editions   Quine, W.
V.
O.
"Two Dogmas of Empiricism" .
The Philosophical Review .
60 (1): 20–43.
doi : 10.2307/2181906 .
JSTOR  2181906 .
Aesthetic value of mathematics  An example of "beauty in method"—a simple and elegant visual descriptor of the Pythagorean theorem .
Mathematical beauty is the aesthetic pleasure derived from the abstractness, purity, simplicity, depth or orderliness of mathematics .
Mathematicians may express this pleasure by describing mathematics (or, at least, some aspect of mathematics) as beautiful or describe mathematics as an art form, (a position taken by G.
H.
Hardy  ) or, at a minimum, as a creative activity .
Comparisons are  made with music and poetry .
In method   Mathematicians    describe an especially pleasing method of proof as elegant .
Depending on context, this may mean:  A proof that uses a minimum of additional assumptions or previous results.
A proof that is unusually succinct.
A proof that derives a result in a surprising way (e.g., from an apparently unrelated theorem or a collection of theorems).
A proof that is based on new and original insights.
A method of proof that can be easily generalized to solve a family of similar problems.
In the search for an elegant proof, mathematicians  often  look for different independent ways to prove a result—as the first proof that is found can often be improved.
The theorem for which the greatest number of different proofs have been discovered is possibly the Pythagorean theorem , with hundreds of proofs being published up to date.
Another theorem that has been proved in many different ways is the theorem of quadratic reciprocity .
In fact, Carl Friedrich Gauss alone had eight different proofs of this theorem, six of which he published.
Conversely, results that are logically correct but involve laborious calculations, over-elaborate methods, highly conventional approaches or a large number of powerful axioms or previous results are usually not considered to be elegant, and may be even referred to as ugly or clumsy .
In results   Starting at e 0 = 1, travelling at the velocity i relative to one's position for the length of time π, and adding 1, one arrives at 0.
(The diagram is an Argand diagram .)
Some mathematicians see beauty in mathematical results that establish connections between two areas of mathematics that at first sight appear to be unrelated.
These results are often described as deep .
While it is difficult to find universal agreement on whether a result is deep, some examples are more commonly cited than others.
One such example is Euler's identity :         e   i  π    +  1  =  0   .
{\displaystyle \displaystyle e^{i\pi }+1=0\,.}
This elegant expression ties together arguably the five most important mathematical constants ( e , i , π, 1, and 0) with the two most common mathematical symbols (+, =).
Euler's identity is a special case of Euler's formula , which the physicist Richard Feynman called "our jewel" and "the most remarkable formula in mathematics".
Modern examples include the modularity theorem , which establishes an important connection between elliptic curves and modular forms (work on which led to the awarding of the Wolf Prize to Andrew Wiles and Robert Langlands ), and " monstrous moonshine ", which connects the Monster group to modular functions via string theory (for which Richard Borcherds was awarded the Fields Medal ).
Other examples of deep results include unexpected insights into mathematical structures.
For example, Gauss's Theorema Egregium is a deep theorem which relates a local phenomenon ( curvature ) to a global phenomenon ( area ) in a surprising way.
In particular, the area of a triangle on a curved surface is proportional to the excess of the triangle and the proportionality is curvature.
Another example is the fundamental theorem of calculus  (and its vector versions including Green's theorem and Stokes' theorem ).
The opposite of deep is trivial .
A trivial theorem may be a result that can be derived in an obvious and straightforward way from other known results, or which applies only to a specific set of particular objects such as the empty set .
In some occasions, a statement of a theorem can be original enough to be considered deep, though its proof is fairly obvious.
In his 1940 essay A Mathematician's Apology , G.
H.
Hardy suggested that a beautiful proof or result possesses "inevitability", "unexpectedness", and "economy".
In 1997, Gian-Carlo Rota , disagreed with unexpectedness as a sufficient condition for beauty and proposed a counterexample:  A great many theorems of mathematics, when first published, appear to be surprising; thus for example some twenty years ago  the proof of the existence of non-equivalent differentiable structures on spheres of high dimension was thought to be surprising, but it did not occur to anyone to call such a fact beautiful, then or now.
In contrast, Monastyrsky wrote in 2001:  It is very difficult to find an analogous invention in the past to Milnor 's beautiful construction of the different differential structures on the seven-dimensional sphere...
The original proof of Milnor was not very constructive, but later E.
Brieskorn showed that these differential structures can be described in an extremely explicit and beautiful form.
This disagreement illustrates both the subjective nature of mathematical beauty and its connection with mathematical results: in this case, not only the existence of exotic spheres, but also a particular realization of them.
In experience   A "cold and austere beauty" has been attributed to the compound of five cubes  This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .
See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.
( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Interest in pure mathematics that is separate from empirical study has been part of the experience of various civilizations , including that of the ancient Greeks , who "did mathematics for the beauty of it".
The aesthetic pleasure that mathematical physicists tend to experience in Einstein's theory of general relativity has been attributed (by Paul Dirac , among others) to its "great mathematical beauty".
The beauty of mathematics is experienced when the physical reality of objects are represented by mathematical models .
Group theory , developed in the early 1800s for the sole purpose of solving polynomial equations, became a fruitful way of categorizing elementary particles —the building blocks of matter.
Similarly, the study of knots provides important insights into string theory and loop quantum gravity .
Some  believe that in order to appreciate mathematics, one must engage in doing mathematics.
For example, Math Circles are after-school enrichment programs where students engage with mathematics through lectures and activities; there are also some teachers who encourage student engagement by teaching mathematics in kinesthetic learning .
In a general Math Circle lesson, students use pattern finding, observation, and exploration to make their own mathematical discoveries.
For example, mathematical beauty arises in a Math Circle activity on symmetry designed for 2nd and 3rd graders, where students create their own snowflakes by folding a square piece of paper and cutting out designs of their choice along the edges of the folded paper.
When the paper is unfolded, a symmetrical design reveals itself.
In a day to day elementary school mathematics class, symmetry can be presented as such in an artistic manner where students see aesthetically pleasing results in mathematics.
Some  teachers prefer to use mathematical manipulatives to present mathematics in an aesthetically pleasing way.
Examples of a manipulative include algebra tiles , cuisenaire rods , and pattern blocks .
For example, one can teach the method of completing the square by using algebra tiles.
Cuisenaire rods can be used to teach fractions, and pattern blocks can be used to teach geometry.
Using mathematical manipulatives helps students gain a conceptual understanding that might not be seen immediately in written mathematical formulas.
Another example of beauty in experience involves the use of origami .
Origami, the art of paper folding, has aesthetic qualities and many mathematical connections.
One can study the mathematics of paper folding by observing the crease pattern on unfolded origami pieces.
Combinatorics , the study of counting, has artistic representations which some  find mathematically beautiful.
There are many visual examples which illustrate combinatorial concepts.
Some of the topics and objects seen in combinatorics courses with visual representations include, among others Four color theorem , Young tableau , Permutohedron , Graph theory , Partition of a set .
Brain imaging experiments conducted by Semir Zeki and his colleagues  show that the experience of mathematical beauty has, as a neural correlate, activity in field A1 of the medial orbito-frontal cortex (mOFC) of the brain and that this activity is parametrically related to the declared intensity of beauty.
The location of the activity is similar to the location of the activity that correlates with the experience of beauty from other sources, such as music or joy or sorrow.
Moreover, mathematicians seem resistant to revising their judgment of the beauty of a mathematical formula in light of contradictory opinion given by their peers.
In philosophy   Some  mathematicians are of the opinion that the doing of mathematics is closer to discovery than invention, for example:  There is no scientific discoverer, no poet, no painter, no musician, who will not tell you that he found ready made his discovery or poem or picture—that it came to him from outside, and that he did not consciously create it from within.
— William Kingdon Clifford , from a lecture to the Royal Institution titled "Some of the conditions of mental development"  These mathematicians believe that the detailed and precise results of mathematics may be reasonably taken to be true without any dependence on the universe in which we live.
For example, they would argue that the theory of the natural numbers is fundamentally valid, in a way that does not require any specific context.
Some mathematicians have extrapolated this viewpoint that mathematical beauty is truth further, in some cases becoming mysticism .
In Plato 's philosophy there were two worlds, the physical one in which we live and another abstract world which contained unchanging truth, including mathematics.
He believed that the physical world was a mere reflection of the more perfect abstract world.
Hungarian mathematician Paul Erdős  spoke of an imaginary book, in which God has written down all the most beautiful mathematical proofs.
When Erdős wanted to express particular appreciation of a proof, he would exclaim "This one's from The Book!"
Twentieth-century French philosopher Alain Badiou claimed that ontology is mathematics.
Badiou also believes in deep connections between mathematics, poetry and philosophy.
In many cases, natural philosophers and other scientists who have made extensive use of mathematics have made leaps of inference between beauty and physical truth in ways that turned out to be erroneous.
For example, at one stage in his life, Johannes Kepler believed that the proportions of the orbits of the then-known planets in the Solar System have been arranged by God to correspond to a concentric arrangement of the five Platonic solids , each orbit lying on the circumsphere of one polyhedron and the insphere of another.
As there are exactly five Platonic solids, Kepler's hypothesis could only accommodate six planetary orbits and was disproved by the subsequent discovery of Uranus .
In information theory   In the 1970s, Abraham Moles and Frieder Nake analyzed links between beauty, information processing , and information theory .
In the 1990s, Jürgen Schmidhuber formulated a mathematical theory of observer-dependent subjective beauty based on algorithmic information theory : the most beautiful objects among subjectively comparable objects have short algorithmic descriptions (i.e., Kolmogorov complexity ) relative to what the observer already knows.
Schmidhuber explicitly distinguishes between beautiful and interesting.
The latter corresponds to the first derivative of subjectively perceived beauty: the observer continually tries to improve the predictability and compressibility of the observations by discovering regularities such as repetitions and symmetries and fractal  self-similarity .
Whenever the observer's learning process (possibly a predictive artificial neural network ) leads to improved data compression such that the observation sequence can be described by fewer bits than before, the temporary interesting-ness of the data corresponds to the compression progress, and is proportional to the observer's internal curiosity reward.
In the arts   Main articles: Mathematics and art , Mathematics and music , and Mathematics and architecture  Music   Examples of the use of mathematics in music include the stochastic music of Iannis Xenakis , the Fibonacci sequence in Tool 's Lateralus , counterpoint of Johann Sebastian Bach , polyrhythmic structures (as in Igor Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring ), the Metric modulation of Elliott Carter , permutation theory in serialism beginning with Arnold Schoenberg , and application of Shepard tones in Karlheinz Stockhausen 's Hymnen .
They also include the application of Group theory to transformations in music in the theoretical writings of David Lewin .
Visual arts   Diagram from Leon Battista Alberti 's 1435 Della Pittura , with pillars in perspective on a grid  Examples of the use of mathematics in the visual arts include applications of chaos theory and fractal geometry to computer-generated art , symmetry studies of Leonardo da Vinci , projective geometries in development of the perspective theory of Renaissance art, grids in Op art , optical geometry in the camera obscura of Giambattista della Porta , and multiple perspective in analytic cubism and futurism .
Sacred geometry is a field of its own, giving rise to countless art forms including some of the best known mystic symbols and religious motifs, and has a particularly rich history in Islamic architecture .
It also provides a means of meditation and comtemplation, for example the study of the Kaballah  Sefirot (Tree Of Life) and Metatron's Cube ; and also the act of drawing itself.
The Dutch graphic designer M.
C.
Escher created mathematically inspired woodcuts , lithographs , and mezzotints .
These feature impossible constructions, explorations of infinity , architecture, visual paradoxes and tessellations .
Some painters and sculptors create work distorted with the mathematical principles of anamorphosis , including South African sculptor Jonty Hurwitz .
British constructionist artist John Ernest created reliefs and paintings inspired by group theory.
A number of other British artists of the constructionist and systems schools of thought also draw on mathematics models and structures as a source of inspiration, including Anthony Hill and Peter Lowe .
Computer-generated art is based on mathematical algorithms .
Quotes by mathematicians   Bertrand Russell expressed his sense of mathematical beauty in these words:   Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty—a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a stern perfection such as only the greatest art can show.
The true spirit of delight, the exaltation, the sense of being more than Man, which is the touchstone of the highest excellence, is to be found in mathematics as surely as poetry.
Paul Erdős expressed his views on the ineffability of mathematics when he said, "Why are numbers beautiful?
It's like asking why is Beethoven's Ninth Symphony beautiful.
If you don't see why, someone can't tell you.
I know numbers are beautiful.
If they aren't beautiful, nothing is".
Hungarian mathematician (1913–1996)    The native form of this personal name is Erdős Pál .
This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.
Paul Erdős Paul Erdős in 1992 Born ( 1913-03-26 ) 26 March 1913 Budapest , Austria-Hungary Died 20 September 1996 (1996-09-20) (aged 83) Warsaw , Poland Nationality Hungarian Alma mater Royal Hungarian Pázmány Péter University Known for Namesakes A very large number of results and conjectures (more than 1,500 articles), and a very large number of coauthors (more than 500) Awards Wolf Prize (1983/84) AMS Cole Prize (1951) Scientific career Fields Pure mathematics Institutions Victoria University of Manchester  Princeton University  Purdue University  University of Pennsylvania  University of Notre Dame  Stanford University  Syracuse University  Hebrew University of Jerusalem  Technion – Israel Institute of Technology  Doctoral advisor Lipót Fejér Doctoral students Joseph Kruskal  George B.
Purdy  Alexander Soifer  Béla Bollobás     Paul Erdős ( Hungarian : Erdős Pál   ; 26 March 1913 – 20 September 1996) was a Hungarian mathematician.
He was one of the most prolific mathematicians and producers of mathematical conjectures  of the 20th century.
Erdős pursued and proposed problems in discrete mathematics , graph theory , number theory , mathematical analysis , approximation theory , set theory , and probability theory .
Much of his work centered around discrete mathematics, cracking many previously unsolved problems in the field.
He championed and contributed to Ramsey theory , which studies the conditions in which order necessarily appears.
Overall, his work leaned towards solving previously open problems , rather than developing or exploring new areas of mathematics.
Erdős published around 1,500 mathematical papers during his lifetime, a figure that remains unsurpassed.
He firmly believed mathematics to be a social activity, living an itinerant lifestyle with the sole purpose of writing mathematical papers with other mathematicians.
He was known both for his social practice of mathematics, working with more than 500 collaborators, and for his eccentric lifestyle; Time magazine called him "The Oddball's Oddball".
He devoted his waking hours to mathematics, even into his later years—indeed, his death came at a mathematics conference in Warsaw .
Erdős's prolific output with co-authors prompted the creation of the Erdős number , the number of steps in the shortest path between a mathematician and Erdős in terms of co-authorships.
Life   Paul Erdős was born on 26 March 1913, in Budapest , Austria-Hungary ,  the only surviving child of Anna ( née Wilhelm) and Lajos Erdős (né Engländer).
His two sisters, aged three and five, both died of scarlet fever a few days before he was born.
His parents, both Jewish , were high school mathematics teachers.
His fascination with mathematics developed early.
He was raised partly by a German governess  because his father was held captive in Siberia as an Austro-Hungarian prisoner of war during 1914–1920,  causing his mother to have to work long hours to support their household.
His father had taught himself English while in captivity, but mispronounced many words.
When Lajos later taught his son to speak English, Paul learned his father's pronunciation, which he continued to use for the rest of his life.
He taught himself to read through mathematics texts that his parents left around in their home.
By the age of five, given a person's age, he could calculate in his head how many seconds they had lived.
Due to his sisters' deaths, he had a close relationship with his mother, with the two of them reportedly sharing the same bed until he left for college.
When he was 16, his father introduced him to two subjects that would become lifetime favourites— infinite series and set theory .
In high school, Erdős became an ardent solver of the problems that appeared each month in KöMaL , the "Mathematical and Physical Journal for Secondary Schools".
Erdős began studying at the University of Budapest when he was 17 after winning a national examination.
At the time, admission of Jews to Hungarian universities was severely restricted under the numerus clausus .
By the time he was 20, he had found a proof for Chebyshev's theorem .
In 1934, at the age of 21, he was awarded a doctorate in mathematics.
Erdős's thesis advisor was Lipót Fejér , who was also the thesis advisor for John von Neumann , George Pólya , and Paul (Pál) Turán .
He took up a post-doctoral fellowship at Manchester , as Jews in Hungary were suffering oppression under the authoritarian regime .
While there he met Godfrey Harold Hardy and Stan Ulam .
Because he was Jewish, Erdős decided Hungary was dangerous and left the country, relocating to the United States in 1938.
Many members of Erdős's family, including two of his aunts, two of his uncles, and his father, died in Budapest during World War II.
His mother was the only one that survived.
He was living in America and working at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton at the time.
However, his fellowship at Princeton only got extended by 6 months rather than the expected year due to Erdős not conforming to the standards of the place; they found him "uncouth and unconventional".
Described by his biographer, Paul Hoffman, as "probably the most eccentric mathematician in the world," Erdős spent most of his adult life living out of a suitcase .
Except for some years in the 1950s, when he was not allowed to enter the United States based on the accusation that he was a Communist sympathizer, his life was a continuous series of going from one meeting or seminar to another.
During his visits, Erdős expected his hosts to lodge him, feed him, and do his laundry, along with anything else he needed, as well as arrange for him to get to his next destination.
Ulam left his post at the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1943 to work on the Manhattan Project in Los Alamos, New Mexico with other mathematicians and physicists.
He invited Erdős to join the project, but the invitation was withdrawn when Erdős expressed a desire to return to Hungary after the war.
On 20 September 1996, at the age of 83, he had a heart attack and died while attending a conference in Warsaw .
These circumstances were close to the way he wanted to die.
He once said,  I want to be giving a lecture, finishing up an important proof on the blackboard, when someone in the audience shouts out, 'What about the general case?'.
I'll turn to the audience and smile, 'I'll leave that to the next generation,' and then I'll keel over.
Erdős never married and had no children.
He is buried next to his mother and father in grave 17A-6-29 in the Jewish Kozma Street Cemetery in Budapest.
For his epitaph , he suggested "I've finally stopped getting dumber."
(Hungarian: "Végre nem butulok tovább" ).
Erdős's name contains the Hungarian letter " ő " ("o" with double acute accent ), but is often incorrectly written as Erdos or Erdös either "by mistake or out of typographical necessity".
Career   In 1934, Erdős moved to Manchester , England, to be a guest lecturer.
In 1938, he accepted his first American position as a scholarship holder at the Institute for Advanced Study , Princeton, New Jersey, for the next ten years.
Despite outstanding papers with Mark Kac and Aurel Wintner on probabilistic number theory , Pál Turán in approximation theory, and Witold Hurewicz on dimension theory, his fellowship was not continued, and
Erdős was forced to take positions as a wandering scholar at the UPenn , Notre Dame , Purdue , Stanford , and Syracuse .
He would not stay long in one place, instead traveling among mathematical institutions until his death.
As a result of the Red Scare and McCarthyism ,    in 1954, the Immigration and Naturalization Service denied Erdős, a Hungarian citizen, a re-entry visa into the United States.
Teaching at the University of Notre Dame at the time, Erdős could have chosen to remain in the country.
Instead, he packed up and left, albeit requesting reconsideration from the U.S. Immigration Services at periodic intervals.
At some point he moved to live in Israel, and was given a position for three months at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, and then a "permanent visiting professor" position at the Technion.
Counter-clockwise from left: Erdős, Fan Chung , and her husband Ronald Graham , Japan 1986  Hungary at the time was under the Warsaw Pact with the Soviet Union .
Although Hungary limited the freedom of its own citizens to enter and exit the country, in 1956 it gave Erdős the exclusive privilege of being allowed to enter and exit the country as he pleased.
In 1963, the U.S. Immigration Service granted Erdős a visa, and he resumed teaching at and traveling to American institutions.
Ten years later, in 1973, the 60-year-old Erdős voluntarily left Hungary.
During the last decades of his life, Erdős received at least fifteen honorary doctorates.
He became a member of the scientific academies of eight countries, including the U.S. National Academy of Sciences and the UK Royal Society .
He became a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1977.
Shortly before his death, he renounced his honorary degree from the University of Waterloo over what he considered to be unfair treatment of colleague Adrian Bondy .
Mathematical work   Erdős was one of the most prolific publishers of papers in mathematical history, comparable only with Leonhard Euler ; Erdős published more papers, mostly in collaboration with other mathematicians, while Euler published more pages, mostly by himself.
Erdős wrote around 1,525 mathematical articles in his lifetime,  mostly with co-authors.
He strongly believed in and practiced mathematics as a social activity,  having 511 different collaborators in his lifetime.
In his mathematical style, Erdős was much more of a "problem solver" than a "theory developer" (see "The Two Cultures of Mathematics"  by Timothy Gowers for an in-depth discussion of the two styles, and why problem solvers are perhaps less appreciated).
Joel Spencer states that "his place in the 20th-century mathematical pantheon is a matter of some controversy because he resolutely concentrated on particular theorems and conjectures throughout his illustrious career."
Erdős never won the highest mathematical prize, the Fields Medal , nor did he coauthor a paper with anyone who did,  a pattern that extends to other prizes.
He did win the Wolf Prize , "for his numerous contributions to number theory , combinatorics , probability , set theory and mathematical analysis , and for personally stimulating mathematicians the world over".
In contrast, the works of the three winners after were recognized as "outstanding", "classic", and "profound", and the three before as "fundamental" or "seminal".
Of his contributions, the development of Ramsey theory and the application of the probabilistic method especially stand out.
Extremal combinatorics owes to him a whole approach, derived in part from the tradition of analytic number theory .
Erdős found a proof for Bertrand's postulate which proved to be far neater than Chebyshev 's original one.
He also discovered the first elementary proof for the prime number theorem , along with Atle Selberg .
However, the circumstances leading up to the proofs, as well as publication disagreements, led to a bitter dispute between Erdős and Selberg.
Erdős also contributed to fields in which he had little real interest, such as topology , where he is credited as the first person to give an example of a totally disconnected  topological space that is not zero-dimensional , the Erdős space .
Erdős's problems   Erdős influenced many young mathematicians.
In this 1985 photo taken at the University of Adelaide , Erdős explains a problem to Terence Tao —who was 10 years old at the time.
Tao received the Fields Medal in 2006, and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2007.
Erdős had a reputation for posing new problems as well as solving existing ones – Ernst Strauss called him "the absolute monarch of problem posers".
Throughout his career, Erdős would offer payments for solutions to unresolved problems.
These ranged from $25 for problems that he felt were just out of the reach of the current mathematical thinking (both his and others) up to $10,000  for problems that were both difficult to attack and mathematically significant.
Some of these problems have since been solved, including the most lucrative – Erdős's conjecture on prime gaps was solved in 2014, and the $10,000 paid.
There are thought to be at least a thousand remaining unsolved problems, though there is no official or comprehensive list.
The offers remained active despite Erdős's death; Ronald Graham was the (informal) administrator of solutions, and a solver could receive either an original check signed by Erdős before his death (for memento only, cannot be cashed) or a cashable check from Graham.
Perhaps the most mathematically notable of these problems is the Erdős conjecture on arithmetic progressions :  If the sum of the reciprocals of a sequence of integers  diverges , then the sequence contains arithmetic progressions of arbitrary length.
If true, it would solve several other open problems in number theory (although one main implication of the conjecture, that the prime numbers contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions, has since been proved independently as the Green–Tao theorem ).
The payment for the solution of the problem is currently worth US$5,000.
The most familiar problem with an Erdős prize is likely the Collatz conjecture , also called the 3 N + 1 problem.
Erdős offered $500 for a solution.
Collaborators   Erdős' most frequent collaborators include Hungarian mathematicians András Sárközy (62 papers) and András Hajnal (56 papers), and American mathematician Ralph Faudree (50 papers).
Other frequent collaborators were the following:     Richard Schelp (42 papers)  C.
C.
Rousseau (35 papers)  Vera Sós (35 papers)  Alfréd Rényi (32 papers)  Pál Turán (30 papers)  Endre Szemerédi (29 papers)  Ron Graham (28 papers)  Stefan Burr (27 papers)  Carl Pomerance (23 papers)  Joel Spencer (23 papers)  János Pach (21 papers)  Miklós Simonovits (21 papers)  Ernst G.
Straus (20 papers)  Melvyn B.
Nathanson (19 papers)  Jean-Louis Nicolas (19 papers)  Richard Rado (18 papers)  Béla Bollobás (18 papers)  Eric Charles Milner (15 papers)  András Gyárfás (15 papers)  John Selfridge (14 papers)  Fan Chung (14 papers)  Richard R.
Hall (14 papers)  George Piranian (14 papers)  István Joó (12 papers)  Zsolt Tuza (12 papers)  A.
R.
Reddy (11 papers)  Vojtěch Rödl (11 papers)  Pál Révész (10 papers)  Zoltán Füredi (10 papers)   For other co-authors of Erdős, see the list of people with Erdős number 1 in List of people by Erdős number .
Erdős number   Main article: Erdős number  Because of his prolific output, friends created the Erdős number as a tribute.
An Erdős number describes a person's degree of separation from Erdős himself, based on their collaboration with him, or with another who has their own Erdős number.
Erdős alone was assigned the Erdős number of 0 (for being himself), while his immediate collaborators could claim an Erdős number of 1, their collaborators have Erdős number at most 2, and so on.
Approximately 200,000 mathematicians have an assigned Erdős number,  and some have estimated that 90 percent of the world's active mathematicians have an Erdős number smaller than 8 (not surprising in light of the small-world phenomenon ).
Due to collaborations with mathematicians, many scientists in fields such as physics, engineering, biology, and economics also have Erdős numbers.
Several studies have shown that leading mathematicians tend to have particularly low Erdős numbers.
For example, the roughly 268,000 mathematicians with a known Erdős number have a median value of 5.
In contrast, the median Erdős number of Fields Medalists is 3.
As of 2015, approximately 11,000 mathematicians have an Erdős number of 2 or less.
Collaboration distances will necessarily increase over long time scales, as mathematicians with low Erdős numbers die and become unavailable for collaboration.
The American Mathematical Society provides a free online tool to determine the Erdős number of every mathematical author listed in the Mathematical Reviews catalogue.
The Erdős number was most likely first defined by Casper Goffman,  an analyst whose own Erdős number is 2.
Goffman published his observations about Erdős's prolific collaboration in a 1969 article titled "And what is your Erdős number?"
Jerry Grossman has written that it could be argued that Baseball Hall of Famer  Hank Aaron can be considered to have an Erdős number of 1 because they both autographed the same baseball (for Carl Pomerance ) when Emory University awarded them honorary degrees on the same day.
Erdős numbers have also been proposed for an infant, a horse, and several actors.
Personality     Another roof, another proof.
— Paul Erdős    Possessions meant little to Erdős; most of his belongings would fit in a suitcase, as dictated by his itinerant lifestyle.
Awards and other earnings were generally donated to people in need and various worthy causes.
He spent most of his life traveling between scientific conferences, universities and the homes of colleagues all over the world.
He earned enough in stipends from universities as a guest lecturer, and from various mathematical awards, to fund his travels and basic needs; money left over he used to fund cash prizes for proofs of "Erdős's problems" (see above).
He would typically show up at a colleague's doorstep and announce "my brain is open", staying long enough to collaborate on a few papers before moving on a few days later.
In many cases, he would ask the current collaborator about whom to visit next.
His colleague Alfréd Rényi said, "a mathematician is a machine for turning coffee into theorems",  and Erdős drank copious quantities; this quotation is often attributed incorrectly to Erdős,  but Erdős himself ascribed it to Rényi.
After his mother's death in 1971 he started taking antidepressants and amphetamines, despite the concern of his friends, one of whom ( Ron Graham ) bet him $500 that he could not stop taking them for a month.
Erdős won the bet, but complained that it impacted his performance: "You've showed me I'm not an addict.
But I didn't get any work done.
I'd get up in the morning and stare at a blank piece of paper.
I'd have no ideas, just like an ordinary person.
You've set mathematics back a month."
After he won the bet, he promptly resumed his use of Ritalin and Benzedrine .
He had his own idiosyncratic vocabulary; although an agnostic atheist ,   he spoke of "The Book", a visualization of a book in which God had written down the best and most elegant proofs for mathematical theorems.
Lecturing in 1985 he said, "You don't have to believe in God, but you should believe in The Book ."
He himself doubted the existence of God, whom he called the "Supreme Fascist" (SF).
He accused SF of hiding his socks and Hungarian passports , and of keeping the most elegant mathematical proofs to himself.
When he saw a particularly beautiful mathematical proof he would exclaim, "This one's from The Book !"
This later inspired a book titled Proofs from the Book .
Other idiosyncratic elements of Erdős's vocabulary include:    Children were referred to as " epsilons " (because in mathematics, particularly calculus , an arbitrarily small positive quantity is commonly denoted by the Greek letter (ε)).
Women were "bosses" who "captured" men as "slaves" by marrying them.
Divorced men were "liberated".
People who stopped doing mathematics had "died", while people who died had "left".
Alcoholic drinks were "poison".
Music (except classical music) was "noise".
To be considered a hack was to be a "Newton".
To give a mathematical lecture was "to preach".
Mathematical lectures themselves were "sermons".
To give an oral exam to students was "to torture" them.
He gave nicknames to many countries, examples being: the U.S. was "samland" (after Uncle Sam )  and the Soviet Union was "joedom" (after Joseph Stalin ).
He claimed that Hindi was the best language because words for old age ( bud̩d̩hā ) and stupidity ( buddhū ) sounded almost the same.
Signature   Erdős signed his name "Paul Erdos P.G.O.M."
When he became 60, he added "L.D.
", at 65 "A.D.", at 70 "L.D."
(again), and at 75 "C.D."
P.G.O.M.
represented "Poor Great Old Man"  The first L.D.
represented "Living Dead"  A.D. represented "Archaeological Discovery"  The second L.D.
represented "Legally Dead"  C.D.
represented "Counts Dead"    Legacy   Grave of Erdős, Kozma Street Cemetery , Budapest  Books and films   Erdős is the subject of at least three books: two biographies ( Hoffman 's The Man Who Loved Only Numbers and Schechter's My Brain is Open , both published in 1998) and a 2013 children's picture book by Deborah Heiligman ( The Boy Who Loved Math: The Improbable Life of Paul Erdős ).
He is also the subject of George Csicsery 's biographical documentary film N is a Number: A Portrait of Paul Erdős ,  made while he was still alive.
Astronomy   In 2021 the minor planet ( asteroid ) 405571 (temporarily designated 2005 QE87) was formally named "Erdőspál" to commemorate Erdős, with the citation describing him as "a Hungarian mathematician, much of whose work centered around discrete mathematics.
His work leaned towards solving previously open problems, rather than developing or exploring new areas of mathematics."
The naming was proposed by "K.
Sárneczky, Z.
Kuli" (Kuli being the asteroid's discoverer).
1998 mathematics book by Aigner and Ziegler  Proofs from THE BOOK Authors Martin Aigner , Günter M.
Ziegler Illustrator K.
H.
Hofmann Language English Subject Mathematical proofs Publisher Springer Publication date 1998 Pages 239 ISBN 3-540-63698-6  Proofs from THE BOOK is a book of mathematical proofs by Martin Aigner and Günter M.
Ziegler .
The book is dedicated to the mathematician  Paul Erdős , who often referred to "The Book" in which God keeps the most elegant proof of each mathematical theorem .
During a lecture in 1985, Erdős said, "You don't have to believe in God, but you should believe in The Book."
Content   Proofs from THE BOOK contains 32 sections (45 in the sixth edition), each devoted to one theorem but often containing multiple proofs and related results.
It spans a broad range of mathematical fields: number theory , geometry , analysis , combinatorics and graph theory .
Erdős himself made many suggestions for the book, but died before its publication.
The book is illustrated by Karl Heinrich Hofmann  .
It has gone through six editions in English, and has been translated into Persian, French, German, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Chinese, Polish, Portuguese, Korean, Turkish, Russian and Spanish.
In November 2017 the American Mathematical Society announced the 2018 Leroy P.
Steele Prize for Mathematical Exposition to be awarded to Aigner and Ziegler for this book.
The proofs include:  Six proofs of the infinitude of the primes , including Euclid 's and Furstenberg's  Proof of Bertrand's postulate  Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares  Two proofs of the Law of quadratic reciprocity  Proof of Wedderburn's little theorem asserting that every finite division ring is a field  Four proofs of the Basel problem  Proof that e is irrational (also showing the irrationality of certain related numbers)  Hilbert's third problem  Sylvester–Gallai theorem and De Bruijn–Erdős theorem  Cauchy's theorem  Borsuk's conjecture  Schröder–Bernstein theorem  Wetzel's problem on families of analytic functions with few distinct values  The fundamental theorem of algebra  Monsky's theorem (4th edition)  Van der Waerden's conjecture  Littlewood–Offord lemma  Buffon's needle problem  Sperner's theorem , Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem and Hall's theorem  Lindström–Gessel–Viennot lemma and the Cauchy–Binet formula  Four proofs of Cayley's formula  Kakeya sets in vector spaces over finite fields  Bregman–Minc inequality  Dinitz problem  Steve Fisk's proof of the art gallery theorem  Five proofs of Turán's theorem  Shannon capacity and Lovász number  Chromatic number of Kneser graphs  Friendship theorem  Some proofs using the probabilistic method  References     ^  Klarreich, Erica (2018-03-19).
"In Search of God's Perfect Proofs" .
Quanta Magazine .
Archived from the original on 2018-05-30 .
Retrieved 2022-07-12 .
Proofs from THE BOOK .
Berlin: Springer.
1998.
ISBN  3-540-63698-6 .
Aigner, Martin; Ziegler, Günter (2009).
Proofs from THE BOOK (4th ed.).
Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag.
ISBN  978-3-642-00855-9 .
Shepherd, Mary (2002-08-15).
"Review of Proofs from THE BOOK" .
MAA Reviews .
This article about a mathematical  publication is a stub .
You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
v t e      Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proofs_from_THE_BOOK&oldid=1183883573 " Page notice  You are not logged in.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof " Page notice  You are not logged in.
===Direct proof===
{{Main|Direct proof}}

In direct proof, the conclusion is established by logically combining the axioms, definitions, and earlier theorems.<ref>Cupillari, p.
20.</ref> For example, direct proof can be used to prove that the sum of two ] ]s is always even:

:Consider two even integers ''x'' and ''y''.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Way of arriving to a mathematical proof  In mathematics and logic , a direct proof is a way of showing the truth or falsehood of a given statement by a straightforward combination of
established facts, usually axioms , existing lemmas and theorems , without making any further assumptions.
In order to directly prove a conditional statement of the form "If p , then q ", it suffices to consider the situations in which the statement p is true.
Logical deduction is employed to reason from assumptions to conclusion.
The type of logic employed is almost invariably first-order logic , employing the quantifiers for all and there exists .
Common proof rules used are modus ponens and universal instantiation .
In contrast, an indirect proof may begin with certain hypothetical scenarios and then proceed to eliminate the uncertainties in each of these scenarios until an inescapable conclusion is forced.
For example, instead of showing directly p ⇒ q , one proves its contrapositive ~ q ⇒ ~ p (one assumes ~ q and shows that it leads to ~ p ).
Since p ⇒ q and ~ q ⇒ ~ p are equivalent by the principle of transposition (see law of excluded middle ), p ⇒ q is indirectly proved.
Proof methods that are not direct include proof by contradiction , including proof by infinite descent .
Direct proof methods include proof by exhaustion and proof by induction .
History and etymology  A direct proof is the simplest form of proof there is.
The word ‘proof’ comes from the Latin word probare,  which means “to test”.
The earliest use of proofs was prominent in legal proceedings.
A person with authority, such as a nobleman, was said to have probity, which means that the evidence was by his relative authority, which outweighed empirical testimony.
In days gone by, mathematics and proof was often intertwined with practical questions – with populations like the Egyptians and the Greeks showing an interest in surveying land.
This led to a natural curiosity with regards to geometry and trigonometry – particularly triangles and rectangles .
These were the shapes which provided the most questions in terms of practical things, so early geometrical concepts were focused on these shapes, for example, the likes of buildings and pyramids used these shapes in abundance.
Another shape which is crucial in the history of direct proof is the circle , which was crucial for the design of arenas and water tanks.
This meant that ancient geometry (and Euclidean Geometry ) discussed circles.
The earliest form of mathematics was phenomenological .
For example, if someone could draw a reasonable picture, or give a convincing description, then that met all the criteria for something to be described as a mathematical “fact”.
On occasion, analogical arguments took place, or even by “invoking the gods”.
The idea that mathematical statements could be proven had not been developed yet, so these were the earliest forms of the concept of proof, despite not being actual proof at all.
Proof as we know it came about with one specific question: “what is a proof?” Traditionally, a proof is a platform which convinces someone beyond reasonable doubt that a statement is mathematically true.
Naturally, one would assume that the best way to prove the truth of something like this (B) would be to draw up a comparison with something old (A) that has already been proven as true.
Thus was created the concept of deriving a new result from an old result.
Examples  The sum of two even integers equals an even integer  Consider two even integers x and y .
Since they are even, they can be written as     x  =  2  a    {\displaystyle x=2a}        y  =  2  b    {\displaystyle y=2b}   respectively for integers a and b .
Then the sum can be written as     x  +  y  =  2  a  +  2  b  =  2  (  a  +  b  )  =  2  p    {\displaystyle x+y=2a+2b=2(a+b)=2p}   where     p  =  a  +  b    {\displaystyle p=a+b}   , a and b are all integers.
It follows that x + y has 2 as a factor and therefore is even, so the sum of any two even integers is even.
Pythagoras' theorem  Diagram of Pythagoras Theorem Observe that we have four right-angled triangles and a square packed into a larger square.
Each of the triangles has sides a and b and hypotenuse c .
The area of a square is defined as the square of the length of its sides.
In this case, the area of the large square is (a + b) 2 .
However, the area of the large square can also be expressed as the sum of the areas of its components.
In this case, that would be the sum of the areas of the four triangles and the small square in the middle.
We know that the area of the large square is equal to (a + b) 2 .
The area of a triangle is equal to       1  2    a  b  .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{2}}ab.}
We know that the area of the large square is also equal to the sum of the areas of the triangles, plus the area of the small square, and thus the area of the large square equals     4  (    1  2    a  b  )  +   c   2    .
{\displaystyle 4({\frac {1}{2}}ab)+c^{2}.}
These are equal, and so     (  a  +  b   )   2    =  4  (    1  2    a  b  )  +   c   2    .
{\displaystyle (a+b)^{2}=4({\frac {1}{2}}ab)+c^{2}.}
After some simplifying,      a   2    +  2  a  b  +   b   2    =  2  a  b  +   c   2    .
{\displaystyle a^{2}+2ab+b^{2}=2ab+c^{2}.}
Removing the 2ab that appears on both sides gives      a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2    ,    {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2},}   which proves Pythagoras' theorem.
∎ The square of an odd number is also odd  By definition, if n is an odd integer, it can be expressed as     n  =  2  k  +  1    {\displaystyle n=2k+1}   for some integer k .
Thus          n   2       =  (  2  k  +  1   )   2          =  (  2  k  +  1  )  (  2  k  +  1  )        =  4   k   2    +  2  k  +  2  k  +  1        =  4   k   2    +  4  k  +  1        =  2  (  2   k   2    +  2  k  )  +  1.
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}n^{2}&=(2k+1)^{2}\\&=(2k+1)(2k+1)\\&=4k^{2}+2k+2k+1\\&=4k^{2}+4k+1\\&=2(2k^{2}+2k)+1.\end{aligned}}}   Since 2 k 2 + 2 k is an integer, n 2 is also odd.
∎ References    ^  Cupillari, Antonella .
The Nuts and Bolts of Proofs .
Academic Press, 2001.
Page 3.
^  C.
Gupta, S.
Singh, S.
Kumar Advanced Discrete Structure .
I.K.
International Publishing House Pvt.
Ltd., 2010.
Page 127.
^  New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary   ^  Krantz, Steven G.
The History and Concept of Mathematical Proof .
February 5, 2007.
^  Krantz, Steven G.
The Proof is the Pudding .
Springer, 2010.
Page 43.
Sources  Franklin, J.
; A.
Daoud (2011).
Proof in Mathematics: An Introduction .
Sydney: Kew Books.
ISBN  978-0-646-54509-7 .
(Ch.
1.)
External links  Direct Proof from Larry W.
Cusick's How To Write Proofs .
Direct Proofs from Patrick Keef and David Guichard's Introduction to Higher Mathematics .
Direct Proof section of Richard Hammack's Book of Proof .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Direct_proof&oldid=1210816985 "Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
For other uses, see Parity (disambiguation) .
"Odd number" redirects here.
For the 1962 Argentine film, see Odd Number (film) .
Property of being an even or odd number  Cuisenaire rods : 5 (yellow) cannot be evenly divided in 2 (red) by any 2 rods of the same color/length, while 6 (dark green) can be evenly divided in 2 by 3 (lime green).
In mathematics , parity is the property of an integer of whether it is even or odd .
An integer is even if it is divisible by 2, and odd if it is not.
For example, −4, 0, and 82 are even numbers, while −3, 5, 7, and 21 are odd numbers.
The above definition of parity applies only to integer numbers, hence it cannot be applied to numbers like 1/2 or 4.201.
See the section "Higher mathematics" below for some extensions of the notion of parity to a larger class of "numbers" or in other more general settings.
Even and odd numbers have opposite parities, e.g., 22 (even number) and 13 (odd number) have opposite parities.
In particular, the parity of zero is even.
Any two consecutive integers have opposite parity.
A number (i.e., integer) expressed in the decimal  numeral system is even or odd according to whether its last digit is even or odd.
That is, if the last digit is 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9, then it is odd; otherwise it is even—as the last digit of any even number is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8.
The same idea will work using any even base.
In particular, a number expressed in the binary numeral system is odd if its last digit is 1; and it is even if its last digit is 0.
In an odd base, the number is even according to the sum of its digits—it is even if and only if the sum of its digits is even.
Definition   An even number is an integer of the form     x  =  2  k    {\displaystyle x=2k}   where k is an integer;  an odd number is an integer of the form     x  =  2  k  +  1.
{\displaystyle x=2k+1.}
An equivalent definition is that an even number is divisible by 2:     2     |     x    {\displaystyle 2\ |\ x}   and an odd number is not:     2    ⧸     |     x    {\displaystyle 2\not |\ x}    The sets of even and odd numbers can be defined as following:       {  2  k  :  k  ∈   Z   }    {\displaystyle \{2k:k\in \mathbb {Z} \}}        {  2  k  +  1  :  k  ∈   Z   }    {\displaystyle \{2k+1:k\in \mathbb {Z} \}}    The set of even numbers is a prime ideal of      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   and the quotient ring       Z    /   2   Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} /2\mathbb {Z} }   is the field with two elements .
Parity can then be defined as the unique ring homomorphism from      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   to      Z    /   2   Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} /2\mathbb {Z} }   where odd numbers are 1 and even numbers are 0.
The consequences of this homomorphism are covered below.
Properties   The following laws can be verified using the properties of divisibility .
They are a special case of rules in modular arithmetic , and are commonly used to check if an equality is likely to be correct by testing the parity of each side.
As with ordinary arithmetic, multiplication and addition are commutative and associative in modulo 2 arithmetic, and multiplication is distributive over addition.
However, subtraction in modulo 2 is identical to addition, so subtraction also possesses these properties, which is not true for normal integer arithmetic.
Addition and subtraction   even ± even = even;   even ± odd = odd;   odd ± odd = even;   Multiplication   even × even = even;   even × odd = even;   odd × odd = odd;   By construction in the previous section, the structure ({even, odd}, +, ×) is in fact the field with two elements .
Division   The division of two whole numbers does not necessarily result in a whole number.
For example, 1 divided by 4 equals 1/4, which is neither even nor odd, since the concepts of even and odd apply only to integers.
But when the quotient is an integer, it will be even if and only if the dividend has more factors of two than the divisor.
History   The ancient Greeks considered 1, the monad , to be neither fully odd nor fully even.
Some of this sentiment survived into the 19th century: Friedrich Wilhelm August Fröbel 's 1826 The Education of Man instructs the teacher to drill students with the claim that 1 is neither even nor odd, to which Fröbel attaches the philosophical afterthought,  It is well to direct the pupil's attention here at once to a great far-reaching law of nature and of thought.
It is this, that between two relatively different things or ideas there stands always a third, in a sort of balance, seeming to unite the two.
Thus, there is here between odd and even numbers one number (one) which is neither of the two.
Similarly, in form, the right angle stands between the acute and obtuse angles; and in language, the semi-vowels or aspirants between the mutes and vowels.
A thoughtful teacher and a pupil taught to think for himself can scarcely help noticing this and other important laws.
Higher mathematics   Higher dimensions and more general classes of numbers    a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h Each of the white bishops is confined to squares of the same parity; the black knight can only jump to squares of alternating parity.
Integer coordinates of points in Euclidean spaces of two or more dimensions also have a parity, usually defined as the parity of the sum of the coordinates.
For instance, the face-centered cubic lattice and its higher-dimensional that is generalizations, the D n  lattices , consist of all of the integer points whose sum of coordinates is even.
This feature manifests itself in chess , where the parity of a square is indicated by its color: bishops are constrained to moving between squares of the same parity, whereas knights alternate parity between moves.
This form of parity was famously used to solve the mutilated chessboard problem : if two opposite corner squares are removed from a chessboard, then the remaining board cannot be covered by dominoes, because each domino covers one square of each parity and there are two more squares of one parity than of the other.
The parity of an ordinal number may be defined to be even if the number is a limit ordinal, or a limit ordinal plus a finite even number, and odd otherwise.
Let R be a commutative ring and let I be an ideal of R whose index is 2.
Elements of the coset      0  +  I    {\displaystyle 0+I}   may be called even , while elements of the coset     1  +  I    {\displaystyle 1+I}   may be called odd .
As an example, let R = Z (2) be the localization of Z at the prime ideal (2).
Then an element of R is even or odd if and only if its numerator is so in Z .
Number theory   The even numbers form an ideal in the ring of integers,  but the odd numbers do not—this is clear from the fact that the identity element for addition, zero, is an element of the even numbers only.
An integer is even if it is congruent to 0 modulo this ideal, in other words if it is congruent to 0 modulo 2, and odd if it is congruent to 1 modulo 2.
All prime numbers are odd, with one exception: the prime number 2.
All known perfect numbers are even; it is unknown whether any odd perfect numbers exist.
Goldbach's conjecture states that every even integer greater than 2 can be represented as a sum of two prime numbers.
Modern computer calculations have shown this conjecture to be true for integers up to at least 4 × 10 18 , but still no general proof has been found.
Group theory   Rubik's Revenge in solved state  The parity of a permutation (as defined in abstract algebra ) is the parity of the number of transpositions into which the permutation can be decomposed.
For example (ABC) to (BCA) is even because it can be done by swapping A and B then C and A (two transpositions).
It can be shown that no permutation can be decomposed both in an even and in an odd number of transpositions.
Hence the above is a suitable definition.
In Rubik's Cube , Megaminx , and other twisting puzzles, the moves of the puzzle allow only even permutations of the puzzle pieces, so parity is important in understanding the configuration space of these puzzles.
The Feit–Thompson theorem states that a finite group is always solvable if its order is an odd number.
This is an example of odd numbers playing a role in an advanced mathematical theorem where the method of application of the simple hypothesis of "odd order" is far from obvious.
Analysis   The parity of a function describes how its values change when its arguments are exchanged with their negations.
An even function, such as an even power of a variable, gives the same result for any argument as for its negation.
An odd function, such as an odd power of a variable, gives for any argument the negation of its result when given the negation of that argument.
It is possible for a function to be neither odd nor even, and for the case f ( x ) = 0, to be both odd and even.
The Taylor series of an even function contains only terms whose exponent is an even number, and the Taylor series of an odd function contains only terms whose exponent is an odd number.
Combinatorial game theory   In combinatorial game theory , an evil number is a number that has an even number of 1's in its binary representation , and an odious number is a number that has an odd number of 1's in its binary representation; these numbers play an important role in the strategy for the game Kayles .
The parity function maps a number to the number of 1's in its binary representation, modulo 2 , so its value is zero for evil numbers and one for odious numbers.
The Thue–Morse sequence , an infinite sequence of 0's and 1's, has a 0 in position i when i is evil, and a 1 in that position when i is odious.
Additional applications   In information theory , a parity bit appended to a binary number provides the simplest form of error detecting code .
If a single bit in the resulting value is changed, then it will no longer have the correct parity: changing a bit in the original number gives it a different parity than the recorded one, and changing the parity bit while not changing the number it was derived from again produces an incorrect result.
In this way, all single-bit transmission errors may be reliably detected.
Some more sophisticated error detecting codes are also based on the use of multiple parity bits for subsets of the bits of the original encoded value.
In wind instruments with a cylindrical bore and in effect closed at one end, such as the clarinet at the mouthpiece, the harmonics produced are odd multiples of the fundamental frequency .
(With cylindrical pipes open at both ends, used for example in some organ stops such as the open diapason , the harmonics are even multiples of the same frequency for the given bore length, but this has the effect of the fundamental frequency being doubled and all multiples of this fundamental frequency being produced.)
See harmonic series (music) .
In some countries, house numberings are chosen so that the houses on one side of a street have even numbers and the houses on the other side have odd numbers.
Similarly, among United States numbered highways , even numbers primarily indicate east–west highways while odd numbers primarily indicate north–south highways.
Among airline flight numbers , even numbers typically identify eastbound or northbound flights, and odd numbers typically identify westbound or southbound flights.
Number in {..., –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, ...}  For computer representation, see Integer (computer science) .
For the generalization in algebraic number theory, see Algebraic integer .
Algebraic structure → Group theory Group theory  Basic notions  Subgroup  Normal subgroup  Quotient group  (Semi-) direct product   Group homomorphisms  kernel  image  direct sum  wreath product  simple  finite  infinite  continuous  multiplicative  additive  cyclic  abelian  dihedral  nilpotent  solvable  action   Glossary of group theory  List of group theory topics    Finite groups  Cyclic group Z n  Symmetric group S n  Alternating group A n  Dihedral group D n  Quaternion group Q   Cauchy's theorem  Lagrange's theorem  Sylow theorems  Hall's theorem  p -group  Elementary abelian group  Frobenius group  Schur multiplier   Classification of finite simple groups  cyclic  alternating  Lie type  sporadic    Discrete groups Lattices  Integers (      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   )  Free group  Modular groups  PSL(2,      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   ) SL(2,      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   )  Arithmetic group  Lattice  Hyperbolic group   Topological and Lie groups  Solenoid  Circle  General linear GL( n )  Special linear SL( n )  Orthogonal O( n )  Euclidean E( n )  Special orthogonal SO( n )  Unitary U( n )  Special unitary SU( n )  Symplectic Sp( n )  G 2  F 4  E 6  E 7  E 8  Lorentz  Poincaré  Conformal  Diffeomorphism  Loop  Infinite dimensional Lie group  O(∞) SU(∞) Sp(∞)   Algebraic groups  Linear algebraic group  Reductive group  Abelian variety  Elliptic curve  v t e  An integer is the number zero ( 0 ), a positive natural number (1, 2, 3, etc.)
or a negative integer ( −1 , −2, −3, etc.).
The negative numbers are the additive inverses of the corresponding positive numbers.
The set of all integers is often denoted by the boldface  Z or blackboard bold       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   .
The set of natural numbers      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   is a subset of      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , which in turn is a subset of the set of all rational numbers       Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   , itself a subset of the real numbers       R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   .
Like the set of natural numbers, the set of integers      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is countably infinite .
An integer may be regarded as a real number that can be written without a fractional component .
For example, 21, 4, 0, and −2048 are integers, while 9.75, 5 + 1 / 2 , and √ 2 are not.
The integers form the smallest group and the smallest ring containing the natural numbers .
In algebraic number theory , the integers are sometimes qualified as rational integers to distinguish them from the more general algebraic integers .
In fact, (rational) integers are algebraic integers that are also rational numbers .
History  The word integer comes from the Latin  integer meaning "whole" or (literally) "untouched", from in ("not") plus tangere ("to touch").
"
Entire " derives from the same origin via the French word entier , which means both entire and integer .
Historically the term was used for a number that was a multiple of 1,   or to the whole part of a mixed number .
Only positive integers were considered, making the term synonymous with the natural numbers .
The definition of integer expanded over time to include negative numbers as their usefulness was recognized.
For example Leonhard Euler in his 1765 Elements of Algebra defined integers to include both positive and negative numbers.
However, European mathematicians, for the most part, resisted the concept of negative numbers until the middle of the 19th century.
The use of the letter Z to denote the set of integers comes from the German word Zahlen ("numbers")   and has been attributed to David Hilbert .
The earliest known use of the notation in a textbook occurs in Algébre written by the collective Nicolas Bourbaki , dating to 1947.
The notation was not adopted immediately, for example another textbook used the letter J  and a 1960 paper used Z to denote the non-negative integers.
But by 1961, Z was generally used by modern algebra texts to denote the positive and negative integers.
The symbol      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is often annotated to denote various sets, with varying usage amongst different authors:       Z    +      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ^{+}}   ,       Z    +      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} _{+}}   or       Z    >      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ^{>}}   for the positive integers,       Z    0  +      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ^{0+}}   or       Z    ≥      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ^{\geq }}   for non-negative integers, and       Z    ≠      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ^{\neq }}   for non-zero integers.
Some authors use       Z    ∗      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ^{*}}   for non-zero integers, while others use it for non-negative integers, or for {–1, 1} (the group of units of      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   ).
Additionally,       Z    p      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} _{p}}   is used to denote either the set of integers modulo p (i.e., the set of congruence classes of integers), or the set of p -adic integers .
The whole numbers were synonymous with the integers up until the early 1950s.
In the late 1950s, as part of the New Math movement,  American elementary school teachers began teaching that "whole numbers" referred to the natural numbers , excluding negative numbers, while "integer" included the negative numbers.
"Whole number" remains ambiguous to the present day.
Algebraic properties  Integers can be thought of as discrete, equally spaced points on an infinitely long number line .
In the above, non- negative integers are shown in blue and negative integers in red.
Algebraic structure → Ring theory Ring theory  Basic concepts Rings  • Subrings  • Ideal  • Quotient ring  • Fractional ideal  • Total ring of fractions  • Product of rings  • Free product of associative algebras  • Tensor product of algebras  Ring homomorphisms   • Kernel  • Inner automorphism  • Frobenius endomorphism  Algebraic structures   • Module  • Associative algebra  • Graded ring  • Involutive ring  • Category of rings  • Initial ring       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }    • Terminal ring      0  =   Z    /   1   Z     {\displaystyle 0=\mathbb {Z} /1\mathbb {Z} }    Related structures   • Field  • Finite field  • Non-associative ring  • Lie ring  • Jordan ring  • Semiring  • Semifield   Commutative algebra Commutative rings  • Integral domain  • Integrally closed domain  • GCD domain  • Unique factorization domain  • Principal ideal domain  • Euclidean domain  • Field  • Finite field  • Composition ring  • Polynomial ring  • Formal power series ring  Algebraic number theory   • Algebraic number field  • Ring of integers  • Algebraic independence  • Transcendental number theory  • Transcendence degree  p -adic number theory and decimals   • Direct limit / Inverse limit  • Zero ring       Z    /   1   Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} /1\mathbb {Z} }    • Integers modulo p n       Z    /    p   n     Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} /p^{n}\mathbb {Z} }    • Prüfer p -ring       Z   (   p   ∞    )    {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} (p^{\infty })}    • Base - p  circle ring       T     {\displaystyle \mathbb {T} }    • Base - p  integers       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }    • p -adic rationals       Z       {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }    • Base - p  real numbers       R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }    • p -adic integers        Z    p      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} _{p}}    • p -adic numbers        Q    p      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} _{p}}    • p -adic solenoid        T    p      {\displaystyle \mathbb {T} _{p}}    Algebraic geometry   • Affine variety   Noncommutative algebra Noncommutative rings  • Division ring  • Semiprimitive ring  • Simple ring  • Commutator  Noncommutative algebraic geometry  Free algebra  Clifford algebra   • Geometric algebra  Operator algebra  v t e  Like the natural numbers ,      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is closed under the operations of addition and multiplication , that is, the sum and product of any two integers is an integer.
However, with the inclusion of the negative natural numbers (and importantly, 0 ),      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , unlike the natural numbers, is also closed under subtraction .
The integers form a unital ring which is the most basic one, in the following sense: for any unital ring, there is a unique ring homomorphism from the integers into this ring.
This universal property , namely to be an initial object in the category of rings , characterizes the ring      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   .
Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is not closed under division , since the quotient of two integers (e.g., 1 divided by 2) need not be an integer.
Although the natural numbers are closed under exponentiation , the integers are not (since the result can be a fraction when the exponent is negative).
The following table lists some of the basic properties of addition and multiplication for any integers a , b and c :  Properties of addition and multiplication on integers    Addition  Multiplication   Closure :  a + b  is an integer  a × b  is an integer   Associativity :  a + ( b + c ) = ( a + b ) + c   a × ( b × c ) = ( a × b ) × c    Commutativity :  a + b = b + a   a × b = b × a    Existence of an identity element :  a + 0 = a   a × 1 = a    Existence of inverse elements :  a + (− a ) = 0   The only invertible integers (called units ) are −1 and 1 .
Distributivity :  a × ( b + c ) = ( a × b ) + ( a × c )  and  ( a + b ) × c = ( a × c ) + ( b × c )    No zero divisors :   If a × b = 0 , then a = 0 or b = 0 (or both)  The first five properties listed above for addition say that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , under addition, is an abelian group .
It is also a cyclic group , since every non-zero integer can be written as a finite sum 1 + 1 + ...
+ 1 or (−1) + (−1) + ...
+ (−1) .
In fact,      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   under addition is the only infinite cyclic group—in the sense that any infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   .
The first four properties listed above for multiplication say that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   under multiplication is a commutative monoid .
However, not every integer has a multiplicative inverse (as is the case of the number 2), which means that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   under multiplication is not a group.
All the rules from the above property table (except for the last), when taken together, say that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   together with addition and multiplication is a commutative ring with unity .
It is the prototype of all objects of such algebraic structure .
Only those equalities of expressions are true in      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }    for all values of variables, which are true in any unital commutative ring.
Certain non-zero integers map to zero in certain rings.
The lack of zero divisors in the integers (last property in the table) means that the commutative ring      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is an integral domain .
The lack of multiplicative inverses, which is equivalent to the fact that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is not closed under division, means that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is not a field .
The smallest field containing the integers as a subring is the field of rational numbers .
The process of constructing the rationals from the integers can be mimicked to form the field of fractions of any integral domain.
And back, starting from an algebraic number field (an extension of rational numbers), its ring of integers can be extracted, which includes      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   as its subring .
Although ordinary division is not defined on      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , the division "with remainder" is defined on them.
It is called Euclidean division , and possesses the following important property: given two integers a and b with b ≠ 0 , there exist unique integers q and r such that a = q × b + r and 0 ≤ r <  | b | , where | b | denotes the absolute value of b .
The integer q is called the quotient and r is called the remainder of the division of a by b .
The Euclidean algorithm for computing greatest common divisors works by a sequence of Euclidean divisions.
The above says that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is a Euclidean domain .
This implies that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is a principal ideal domain , and any positive integer can be written as the products of primes in an essentially unique way.
This is the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
Order-theoretic properties       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is a totally ordered set without upper or lower bound .
The ordering of      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is given by: :...
−3 < −2 < −1 < 0 < 1 < 2 < 3 < ...
An integer is positive if it is greater than zero , and negative if it is less than zero.
Zero is defined as neither negative nor positive.
The ordering of integers is compatible with the algebraic operations in the following way:  if a < b and c < d , then a + c < b + d  if a < b and 0 < c , then ac < bc .
Thus it follows that      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   together with the above ordering is an ordered ring .
The integers are the only nontrivial totally ordered  abelian group whose positive elements are well-ordered .
This is equivalent to the statement that any Noetherian  valuation ring is either a field —or a discrete valuation ring .
Construction  Traditional development  In elementary school teaching, integers are often intuitively defined as the union of the (positive) natural numbers, zero , and the negations of the natural numbers.
This can be formalized as follows.
First construct the set of natural numbers according to the Peano axioms , call this     P    {\displaystyle P}   .
Then construct a set      P   −      {\displaystyle P^{-}}   which is disjoint from     P    {\displaystyle P}   and in one-to-one correspondence with     P    {\displaystyle P}   via a function     ψ    {\displaystyle \psi }   .
For example, take      P   −      {\displaystyle P^{-}}   to be the ordered pairs      (  1  ,  n  )    {\displaystyle (1,n)}   with the mapping     ψ  =  n  ↦  (  1  ,  n  )    {\displaystyle \psi =n\mapsto (1,n)}   .
Finally let 0 be some object not in     P    {\displaystyle P}   or      P   −      {\displaystyle P^{-}}   , for example the ordered pair     (  0  ,  0  )    {\displaystyle (0,0)}   .
Then the integers are defined to be the union     P  ∪   P   −    ∪  {  0  }    {\displaystyle P\cup P^{-}\cup \{0\}}   .
The traditional arithmetic operations can then be defined on the integers in a piecewise fashion, for each of positive numbers, negative numbers, and zero.
For example negation is defined as follows:     −  x  =    {     ψ  (  x  )  ,     if   x  ∈  P       ψ   −  1    (  x  )  ,     if   x  ∈   P   −        0  ,     if   x  =  0          {\displaystyle -x={\begin{cases}\psi (x),&{\text{if }}x\in P\\\psi ^{-1}(x),&{\text{if }}x\in P^{-}\\0,&{\text{if }}x=0\end{cases}}}    The traditional style of definition leads to many different cases (each arithmetic operation needs to be defined on each combination of types of integer) and makes it tedious to prove that integers obey the various laws of arithmetic.
Equivalence classes of ordered pairs  Red points represent ordered pairs of natural numbers .
Linked red points are equivalence classes representing the blue integers at the end of the line.
In modern set-theoretic mathematics, a more abstract construction   allowing one to define arithmetical operations without any case distinction is often used instead.
The integers can thus be formally constructed as the equivalence classes of ordered pairs of natural numbers  ( a , b ) .
The intuition is that ( a , b ) stands for the result of subtracting b from a .
To confirm our expectation that 1 − 2 and 4 − 5 denote the same number, we define an equivalence relation  ~ on these pairs with the following rule:      (  a  ,  b  )  ∼  (  c  ,  d  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)\sim (c,d)}    precisely when      a  +  d  =  b  +  c  .
{\displaystyle a+d=b+c.}
Addition and multiplication of integers can be defined in terms of the equivalent operations on the natural numbers;  by using  to denote the equivalence class having ( a , b ) as a member, one has:        +    :=    .
{\displaystyle +:=.}
⋅    :=    .
{\displaystyle \cdot :=.}
The negation (or additive inverse) of an integer is obtained by reversing the order of the pair:      −    :=    .
{\displaystyle -:=.}
Hence subtraction can be defined as the addition of the additive inverse:        −    :=    .
The standard ordering on the integers is given by:        <      {\displaystyle <}    if and only if      a  +  d  <  b  +  c  .
{\displaystyle a+d<b+c.}
It is easily verified that these definitions are independent of the choice of representatives of the equivalence classes.
Every equivalence class has a unique member that is of the form ( n ,0) or (0, n ) (or both at once).
The natural number n is identified with the class  (i.e., the natural numbers are embedded into the integers by map sending n to  ), and the class  is denoted − n (this covers all remaining classes, and gives the class  a second time since −0 = 0.
Thus,  is denoted by        {     a  −  b  ,      if    a  ≥  b      −  (  b  −  a  )  ,      if    a  <  b  .
{\displaystyle {\begin{cases}a-b,&{\mbox{if }}a\geq b\\-(b-a),&{\mbox{if }}a<b.\end{cases}}}    If the natural numbers are identified with the corresponding integers (using the embedding mentioned above), this convention creates no ambiguity.
This notation recovers the familiar representation of the integers as {..., −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, ...} .
Some examples are:          0     =      =       =  ⋯      =        1     =      =       =  ⋯      =        −  1     =      =       =  ⋯      =        2     =      =       =  ⋯      =        −  2     =      =       =  ⋯      =    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}0&=&=&=\cdots &&=\\1&=&=&=\cdots &&=\\-1&=&=&=\cdots &&=\\2&=&=&=\cdots &&=\\-2&=&=&=\cdots &&=.\end{aligned}}}    Other approaches  In theoretical computer science, other approaches for the construction of integers are used by automated theorem provers and term rewrite engines .
Integers are represented as algebraic terms built using a few basic operations (e.g., zero , succ , pred ) and, possibly, using natural numbers , which are assumed to be already constructed (using, say, the Peano approach ).
There exist at least ten such constructions of signed integers.
These constructions differ in several ways: the number of basic operations used for the construction, the number (usually, between 0 and 2) and the types of arguments accepted by these operations; the presence or absence of natural numbers as arguments of some of these operations, and the fact that these operations are free constructors or not, i.e., that the same integer can be represented using only one or many algebraic terms.
The technique for the construction of integers presented in the previous section corresponds to the particular case where there is a single basic operation pair     (  x  ,  y  )    {\displaystyle (x,y)}   that takes as arguments two natural numbers     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   , and returns an integer (equal to     x  −  y    {\displaystyle x-y}   ).
This operation is not free since the integer 0 can be written pair (0,0), or pair (1,1), or pair (2,2), etc.
This technique of construction is used by the proof assistant  Isabelle ; however, many other tools use alternative construction techniques, notable those based upon free constructors, which are simpler and can be implemented more efficiently in computers.
Computer science  Main article: Integer (computer science)  An integer is often a primitive data type in computer languages .
However, integer data types can only represent a subset of all integers, since practical computers are of finite capacity.
Also, in the common two's complement representation, the inherent definition of sign distinguishes between "negative" and "non-negative" rather than "negative, positive, and 0".
(It is, however, certainly possible for a computer to determine whether an integer value is truly positive.)
Fixed length integer approximation data types (or subsets) are denoted int or Integer in several programming languages (such as Algol68 , C , Java , Delphi , etc.).
Variable-length representations of integers, such as bignums , can store any integer that fits in the computer's memory.
Other integer data types are implemented with a fixed size, usually a number of bits which is a power of 2 (4, 8, 16, etc.)
or a memorable number of decimal digits (e.g., 9 or 10).
Cardinality  The set of integers is countably infinite , meaning it is possible to pair each integer with a unique natural number.
An example of such a pairing is  (0, 1), (1, 2), (−1, 3), (2, 4), (−2, 5), (3, 6), .
, (1 − k , 2 k − 1), ( k , 2 k ), .
More technically, the cardinality of      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   is said to equal ℵ 0 ( aleph-null ).
The pairing between elements of      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   and      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   is called a bijection .
Integer that is a factor of another integer  This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .
( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  This article is about an integer that is a factor of another integer.
For a number used to divide another number in a division operation, see Division (mathematics) .
For other uses, see Divisor (disambiguation) .
"Divisible" redirects here.
For divisibility of groups, see Divisible group .
The divisors of 10 illustrated with Cuisenaire rods : 1, 2, 5, and 10  In mathematics , a divisor of an integer     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}   also called a factor of     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}   is an integer      m    {\displaystyle m}   that may be multiplied by some integer to produce     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}    In this case, one also says that     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a multiple of     m  .
{\displaystyle m.}   An integer     n    {\displaystyle n}   is divisible or evenly divisible by another integer     m    {\displaystyle m}   if     m    {\displaystyle m}   is a divisor of     n    {\displaystyle n}   ; this implies dividing     n    {\displaystyle n}   by     m    {\displaystyle m}   leaves no remainder.
Definition   An integer      n    {\displaystyle n}   is divisible by a nonzero integer     m    {\displaystyle m}   if there exists an integer     k    {\displaystyle k}   such that     n  =  k  m  .
{\displaystyle n=km.}
This is written as      m  ∣  n  .
{\displaystyle m\mid n.}    This may be read as that     m    {\displaystyle m}   divides     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}        m    {\displaystyle m}   is a divisor of     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}        m    {\displaystyle m}   is a factor of     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}   or     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a multiple of     m  .
{\displaystyle m.}   If     m    {\displaystyle m}   does not divide     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}   then the notation is     m  ∤  n  .
{\displaystyle m\not \mid n.}      There are two conventions, distinguished by whether     m    {\displaystyle m}   is permitted to be zero:  With the convention without an additional constraint on     m  ,    {\displaystyle m,}        m  ∣  0    {\displaystyle m\mid 0}   for every integer     m  .
{\displaystyle m.}      With the convention that     m    {\displaystyle m}   be nonzero,     m  ∣  0    {\displaystyle m\mid 0}   for every nonzero integer     m  .
{\displaystyle m.}      General   Divisors can be negative as well as positive, although often the term is restricted to positive divisors.
For example, there are six divisors of 4; they are 1, 2, 4, −1, −2, and −4, but only the positive ones (1, 2, and 4) would usually be mentioned.
1 and −1 divide (are divisors of) every integer.
Every integer (and its negation) is a divisor of itself.
Integers divisible by 2 are called even , and integers not divisible by 2 are called odd .
1, −1,     n    {\displaystyle n}   and     −  n    {\displaystyle -n}   are known as the trivial divisors of     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}   A divisor of     n    {\displaystyle n}   that is not a trivial divisor is known as a non-trivial divisor (or strict divisor  ).
A nonzero integer with at least one non-trivial divisor is known as a composite number , while the units −1 and 1 and prime numbers have no non-trivial divisors.
There are divisibility rules that allow one to recognize certain divisors of a number from the number's digits.
Examples   Plot of the number of divisors of integers from 1 to 1000.
Prime numbers have exactly 2 divisors, and highly composite numbers are in bold.
7 is a divisor of 42 because     7  ×  6  =  42  ,    {\displaystyle 7\times 6=42,}   so we can say     7  ∣  42.
{\displaystyle 7\mid 42.}
It can also be said that 42 is divisible by 7, 42 is a multiple of 7, 7 divides 42, or 7 is a factor of 42.
The non-trivial divisors of 6 are 2, −2, 3, −3.
The positive divisors of 42 are 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 14, 21, 42.
The set of all positive divisors of 60,     A  =  {  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  4  ,  5  ,  6  ,  10  ,  12  ,  15  ,  20  ,  30  ,  60  }  ,    {\displaystyle A=\{1,2,3,4,5,6,10,12,15,20,30,60\},}    partially ordered by divisibility, has the Hasse diagram :   Further notions and facts   There are some elementary rules:  If     a  ∣  b    {\displaystyle a\mid b}   and     b  ∣  c  ,    {\displaystyle b\mid c,}   then     a  ∣  c  ,    {\displaystyle a\mid c,}   i.e.
divisibility is a transitive relation .
If     a  ∣  b    {\displaystyle a\mid b}   and     b  ∣  a  ,    {\displaystyle b\mid a,}   then     a  =  b    {\displaystyle a=b}   or     a  =  −  b  .
{\displaystyle a=-b.}
If     a  ∣  b    {\displaystyle a\mid b}   and     a  ∣  c  ,    {\displaystyle a\mid c,}   then     a  ∣  (  b  +  c  )    {\displaystyle a\mid (b+c)}   holds, as does     a  ∣  (  b  −  c  )  .
{\displaystyle a\mid (b-c).}
However, if     a  ∣  b    {\displaystyle a\mid b}   and     c  ∣  b  ,    {\displaystyle c\mid b,}   then     (  a  +  c  )  ∣  b    {\displaystyle (a+c)\mid b}   does not always hold (e.g.
2  ∣  6    {\displaystyle 2\mid 6}   and     3  ∣  6    {\displaystyle 3\mid 6}   but 5 does not divide 6).
If     a  ∣  b  c  ,    {\displaystyle a\mid bc,}   and     gcd  (  a  ,  b  )  =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \gcd(a,b)=1,}   then     a  ∣  c  .
{\displaystyle a\mid c.}    This is called Euclid's lemma .
If     p    {\displaystyle p}   is a prime number and     p  ∣  a  b    {\displaystyle p\mid ab}   then     p  ∣  a    {\displaystyle p\mid a}   or     p  ∣  b  .
{\displaystyle p\mid b.}
A positive divisor of     n    {\displaystyle n}   that is different from     n    {\displaystyle n}   is called a proper divisor or an aliquot part of     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}   A number that does not evenly divide     n    {\displaystyle n}   but leaves a remainder is sometimes called an aliquant part of     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}    An integer     n  >  1    {\displaystyle n>1}   whose only proper divisor is 1 is called a prime number .
Equivalently, a prime number is a positive integer that has exactly two positive factors: 1 and itself.
Any positive divisor of     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a product of prime divisors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   raised to some power.
This is a consequence of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
A number     n    {\displaystyle n}   is said to be perfect if it equals the sum of its proper divisors, deficient if the sum of its proper divisors is less than     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}   and abundant if this sum exceeds     n  .
{\displaystyle n.}    The total number of positive divisors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a multiplicative function      d  (  n  )  ,    {\displaystyle d(n),}   meaning that when two numbers     m    {\displaystyle m}   and     n    {\displaystyle n}   are relatively prime , then     d  (  m  n  )  =  d  (  m  )  ×  d  (  n  )  .
{\displaystyle d(mn)=d(m)\times d(n).}
For instance,     d  (  42  )  =  8  =  2  ×  2  ×  2  =  d  (  2  )  ×  d  (  3  )  ×  d  (  7  )    {\displaystyle d(42)=8=2\times 2\times 2=d(2)\times d(3)\times d(7)}   ; the eight divisors of 42 are 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 14, 21 and 42.
However, the number of positive divisors is not a totally multiplicative function: if the two numbers     m    {\displaystyle m}   and     n    {\displaystyle n}   share a common divisor, then it might not be true that     d  (  m  n  )  =  d  (  m  )  ×  d  (  n  )  .
The sum of the positive divisors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   is another multiplicative function     σ  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \sigma (n)}   (e.g.
σ  (  42  )  =  96  =  3  ×  4  ×  8  =  σ  (  2  )  ×  σ  (  3  )  ×  σ  (  7  )  =  1  +  2  +  3  +  6  +  7  +  14  +  21  +  42    {\displaystyle \sigma (42)=96=3\times 4\times 8=\sigma (2)\times \sigma (3)\times \sigma (7)=1+2+3+6+7+14+21+42}   ).
Both of these functions are examples of divisor functions .
If the prime factorization of     n    {\displaystyle n}   is given by      n  =   p   1     ν   1        p   2     ν   2      ⋯   p   k     ν   k        {\displaystyle n=p_{1}^{\nu _{1}}\,p_{2}^{\nu _{2}}\cdots p_{k}^{\nu _{k}}}    then the number of positive divisors of     n    {\displaystyle n}   is      d  (  n  )  =  (   ν   1    +  1  )  (   ν   2    +  1  )  ⋯  (   ν   k    +  1  )  ,    {\displaystyle d(n)=(\nu _{1}+1)(\nu _{2}+1)\cdots (\nu _{k}+1),}    and each of the divisors has the form       p   1     μ   1        p   2     μ   2      ⋯   p   k     μ   k        {\displaystyle p_{1}^{\mu _{1}}\,p_{2}^{\mu _{2}}\cdots p_{k}^{\mu _{k}}}    where     0  ≤   μ   i    ≤   ν   i      {\displaystyle 0\leq \mu _{i}\leq \nu _{i}}   for each     1  ≤  i  ≤  k  .
{\displaystyle 1\leq i\leq k.}    For every natural     n  ,    {\displaystyle n,}        d  (  n  )  <  2    n    .
{\displaystyle d(n)<2{\sqrt {n}}.}
Also,        d  (  1  )  +  d  (  2  )  +  ⋯  +  d  (  n  )  =  n  ln  ⁡  n  +  (  2  γ  −  1  )  n  +  O  (    n    )  ,    {\displaystyle d(1)+d(2)+\cdots +d(n)=n\ln n+(2\gamma -1)n+O({\sqrt {n}}),}    where     γ    {\displaystyle \gamma }   is Euler–Mascheroni constant .
One interpretation of this result is that a randomly chosen positive integer n has an average
number of divisors of about     ln  ⁡  n  .
{\displaystyle \ln n.}   However, this is a result from the contributions of numbers with "abnormally many" divisors .
In abstract algebra   Ring theory   Main article: Divisibility (ring theory)  Division lattice   Main article: Division lattice  In definitions that allow the divisor to be 0, the relation of divisibility turns the set      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   of non-negative integers into a partially ordered set that is a complete distributive lattice .
The largest element of this lattice is 0 and the smallest is 1.
The meet operation ∧ is given by the greatest common divisor and the join operation ∨ by the least common multiple .
This lattice is isomorphic to the dual of the lattice of subgroups of the infinite cyclic group Z.
Operation on the subsets of a set  This article is about closures in general.
For the specific use in topology, see Closure (topology) .
For the use in computer science, see closure (computer science) .
In mathematics, a subset of a given set is closed under an operation of the larger set if performing that operation on members of the subset always produces a member of that subset.
For example, the natural numbers are closed under addition, but not under subtraction: 1 − 2 is not a natural number, although both 1 and 2 are.
Similarly, a subset is said to be closed under a collection of operations if it is closed under each of the operations individually.
The closure of a subset is the result of a closure operator applied to the subset.
The closure of a subset under some operations is the smallest superset that is closed under these operations.
It is often called the span (for example linear span ) or the generated set .
Definitions  Let S be a set equipped with one or several methods for producing elements of S from other elements of S .
A subset X of S is said to be closed under these methods, if, when all input elements are in X , then all possible results are also in X .
Sometimes, one may also say that X has the closure property .
The main property of closed sets, which results immediately from the definition, is that every intersection of closed sets is a closed set.
It follows that for every subset Y of S , there is a smallest closed subset X of S such that     Y  ⊆  X    {\displaystyle Y\subseteq X}   (it is the intersection of all closed subsets that contain Y ).
Depending on the context, X is called the closure of Y or the set generated or spanned by Y .
The concepts of closed sets and closure are often extended to any property of subsets that are stable under intersection; that is, every intersection of subsets that have the property has also the property.
For example, in       C    n    ,    {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} ^{n},}   a Zariski-closed set , also known as an algebraic set , is the set of the common zeros of a family of polynomials, and the Zariski closure of a set V of points is the smallest algebraic set that contains V .
In algebraic structures  An algebraic structure is a set equipped with operations that satisfy some axioms .
These axioms may be identities .
Some axioms may contain existential quantifiers      ∃  ;    {\displaystyle \exists ;}   in this case it is worth to add some auxiliary operations in order that all axioms become identities or purely universally quantified formulas.
See Algebraic structure for details.
In this context, given an algebraic structure S , a substructure of S is a subset that is closed under all operations of S , including the auxiliary operations that are needed for avoiding existential quantifiers.
A substructure is an algebraic structure of the same type as S .
It follows that, in a specific example, when closeness is proved, there is no need to check the axioms for proving that a substructure is a structure of the same type.
Given a subset X of an algebraic structure S , the closure of X is the smallest substructure of S that is closed under all operations of S .
In the context of algebraic structures, this closure is generally called the substructure generated or spanned by X , and one says that X is a generating set of the substructure.
For example, a group is a set with an associative operation , often called multiplication , with an identity element , such that every element has an inverse element .
Here, the auxiliary operations are the nullary operation that results in the identity element and the unary operation of inversion.
A subset of a group that is closed under multiplication and inversion is also closed under the nullary operation (that is, it contains the identity) if and only if it is non-empty.
So, a non-empty subset of a group that is closed under multiplication and inversion is a group that is called a subgroup .
The subgroup generated by a single element, that is, the closure of this element, is called a cyclic group .
In linear algebra , the closure of a non-empty subset of a vector space (under vector-space operations, that is, addition and scalar multiplication) is the linear span of this subset.
It is a vector space by the preceding general result, and it can be proved easily that is the set of linear combinations of elements of the subset.
Similar examples can be given for almost every algebraic structures, with, sometimes some specific terminology.
For example, in a commutative ring , the closure of a single element under ideal operations is called a principal ideal .
Binary relations  A binary relation on a set A can be defined as a subset R of     A  ×  A  ,    {\displaystyle A\times A,}   the set of the ordered pairs of elements of A .
The notation     x  R  y    {\displaystyle xRy}   is commonly used for     (  x  ,  y  )  ∈  R  .
{\displaystyle (x,y)\in R.}   Many properties or operations on relations can be used to define closures.
Some of the most common ones follow: Reflexivity  A relation R on the set A is reflexive if     (  x  ,  x  )  ∈  R    {\displaystyle (x,x)\in R}   for every     x  ∈  A  .
{\displaystyle x\in A.}
As every intersection of reflexive relations is reflexive, this defines a closure.
The reflexive closure of a relation R is thus     R  ∪  {  (  x  ,  x  )  ∣  x  ∈  A  }  .
{\displaystyle R\cup \{(x,x)\mid x\in A\}.}
Symmetry  Symmetry is the unary operation on     A  ×  A    {\displaystyle A\times A}   that maps     (  x  ,  y  )    {\displaystyle (x,y)}   to     (  y  ,  x  )  .
{\displaystyle (y,x).}
A relation is symmetric if it is closed under this operation, and the symmetric closure of a relation R is its closure under this relation.
Transitivity  Transitivity is defined by the partial binary operation on     A  ×  A    {\displaystyle A\times A}   that maps     (  x  ,  y  )    {\displaystyle (x,y)}   and     (  y  ,  z  )    {\displaystyle (y,z)}   to     (  x  ,  z  )  .
{\displaystyle (x,z).}
A relation is transitive if it is closed under this operation, and the transitive closure of a relation is its closure under this operation.
A preorder is a relation that is reflective and transitive.
It follows that the reflexive transitive closure of a relation is the smallest preorder containing it.
Similarly, the reflexive transitive symmetric closure or equivalence closure of a relation is the smallest equivalence relation that contains it.
Other examples  In matroid theory, the closure of X is the largest superset of X that has the same rank as X .
The transitive closure of a set .
The algebraic closure of a field .
The integral closure of an integral domain in a field that contains it.
The radical of an ideal in a commutative ring .
In geometry , the convex hull of a set S of points is the smallest convex set of which S is a subset .
In formal languages , the Kleene closure of a language can be described as the set of strings that can be made by concatenating zero or more strings from that language.
In group theory , the conjugate closure or normal closure of a set of group elements is the smallest normal subgroup containing the set.
In mathematical analysis and in probability theory , the closure of a collection of subsets of X under countably many  set operations is called the σ-algebra generated by the collection.
Closure operator  Main article: Closure operator In the preceding sections, closures are considered for subsets of a given set.
The subsets of a set form a partially ordered set (poset) for inclusion .
Closure operators allow generalizing the concept of closure to any partially ordered set.
Given a poset S whose partial order is denoted with ≤ , a closure operator on S is a function      C  :  S  →  S    {\displaystyle C:S\to S}   that is increasing (     x  ≤  C  (  x  )    {\displaystyle x\leq C(x)}   for all     x  ∈  S    {\displaystyle x\in S}   ),  idempotent (     C  (  C  (  x  )  )  =  C  (  x  )    {\displaystyle C(C(x))=C(x)}   ), and  monotonic (     x  ≤  y   ⟹   C  (  x  )  ≤  C  (  y  )    {\displaystyle x\leq y\implies C(x)\leq C(y)}   ).
Equivalently, a function from S to S is a closure operator if     x  ≤  C  (  y  )   ⟺   C  (  x  )  ≤  C  (  y  )    {\displaystyle x\leq C(y)\iff C(x)\leq C(y)}   for all     x  ,  y  ∈  S  .
{\displaystyle x,y\in S.}    An element of S is closed if it is its own closure, that is, if     x  =  C  (  x  )  .
{\displaystyle x=C(x).}
By idempotency, an element is closed if and only if it is the closure of some element of S .
An example is the topological closure operator; in Kuratowski's characterization , axioms K2, K3, K4' correspond to the above defining properties.
An example not operating on subsets is the ceiling function , which maps every real number x to the smallest integer that is not smaller than x .
Closure operator vs.
closed sets  A closure on the subsets of a given set may be defined either by a closure operator or by a set of closed sets that is stable under intersection and includes the given set.
These two definitions are equivalent.
Indeed, the defining properties of a closure operator C implies that an intersection of closed sets is closed: if     X  =  ⋂   X   i      {\textstyle X=\bigcap X_{i}}   is an intersection of closed sets, then     C  (  X  )    {\displaystyle C(X)}   must contain X and be contained in every      X   i    .
{\displaystyle X_{i}.}
This implies     C  (  X  )  =  X    {\displaystyle C(X)=X}   by definition of the intersection.
Conversely, if closed sets are given and every intersection of closed sets is closed, then one can define a closure operator C such that     C  (  X  )    {\displaystyle C(X)}   is the intersection of the closed sets containing X .
This equivalence remains true for partially ordered sets with the greatest-lower-bound property , if one replace "closed sets" by "closed elements" and "intersection" by "greatest lower bound".
Notes    ^  Operations and ( partial ) multivariate function are examples of such methods.
If S is a topological space , the limit of a sequence of elements of S is an example, where there are an infinity of input elements and the result is not always defined.
If S is a field the roots in S of a polynomial with coefficients in S is another example where the result may be not unique.
References   Mathematics portal   ^  Weisstein, Eric W.
"Transitive Closure" .
mathworld.wolfram.com .
Retrieved 2020-07-25 .
^  Weisstein, Eric W.
"Algebraic Closure" .
^  Bernstein, Dennis S.
(2005).
Matrix Mathematics: Theory, Facts, and Formulas with Application to Linear Systems Theory .
p.
25.
ISBN  978-0-691-11802-4 .
...convex hull of S, denoted by coS, is the smallest convex set containing S.
  ^  Birkhoff, Garrett (1967).
Lattice Theory .
Colloquium Publications.
25.
Am.
Math.
Soc.
p.
111.
ISBN  9780821889534 .
Weisstein, Eric W.
 "Algebraic Closure" .
MathWorld .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Closure_(mathematics)&oldid=1216889889 "Property involving two mathematical operations  "Distributivity" redirects here.
Not to be confused with Distributivism .
Distributive property Visualization of distributive law for positive numbers Type Law , rule of replacement Field  Elementary algebra  Boolean algebra  Abstract algebra  Set theory  Propositional calculus  Symbolic statement  Elementary algebra     x  ⋅  (  y  +  z  )  =  x  ⋅  y  +  x  ⋅  z    {\displaystyle x\cdot (y+z)=x\cdot y+x\cdot z}    Propositional calculus:     (  P  ∧  (  Q  ∨  R  )  )  ⇔  (  (  P  ∧  Q  )  ∨  (  P  ∧  R  )  )    {\displaystyle (P\land (Q\lor R))\Leftrightarrow ((P\land Q)\lor (P\land R))}        (  P  ∨  (  Q  ∧  R  )  )  ⇔  (  (  P  ∨  Q  )  ∧  (  P  ∨  R  )  )    {\displaystyle (P\lor (Q\land R))\Leftrightarrow ((P\lor Q)\land (P\lor R))}     In mathematics , the distributive property of binary operations is a generalization of the distributive law , which asserts that the equality     x  ⋅  (  y  +  z  )  =  x  ⋅  y  +  x  ⋅  z    {\displaystyle x\cdot (y+z)=x\cdot y+x\cdot z}   is always true in elementary algebra .
For example, in elementary arithmetic , one has     2  ⋅  (  1  +  3  )  =  (  2  ⋅  1  )  +  (  2  ⋅  3  )  .
{\displaystyle 2\cdot (1+3)=(2\cdot 1)+(2\cdot 3).}
Therefore, one would say that multiplication  distributes over addition .
This basic property of numbers is part of the definition of most algebraic structures that have two operations called addition and multiplication, such as complex numbers , polynomials , matrices , rings , and fields .
It is also encountered in Boolean algebra and mathematical logic , where each of the logical and (denoted      ∧     {\displaystyle \,\land \,}   ) and the logical or (denoted      ∨     {\displaystyle \,\lor \,}   ) distributes over the other.
Definition  Given a set      S    {\displaystyle S}   and two binary operators       ∗     {\displaystyle \,*\,}   and      +     {\displaystyle \,+\,}   on     S  ,    {\displaystyle S,}    the operation      ∗     {\displaystyle \,*\,}   is left-distributive over (or with respect to)      +     {\displaystyle \,+\,}   if, given any elements     x  ,  y  ,   and   z    {\displaystyle x,y,{\text{ and }}z}   of     S  ,    {\displaystyle S,}       x  ∗  (  y  +  z  )  =  (  x  ∗  y  )  +  (  x  ∗  z  )  ;    {\displaystyle x*(y+z)=(x*y)+(x*z);}    the operation      ∗     {\displaystyle \,*\,}   is right-distributive over      +     {\displaystyle \,+\,}   if, given any elements     x  ,  y  ,   and   z    {\displaystyle x,y,{\text{ and }}z}   of     S  ,    {\displaystyle S,}       (  y  +  z  )  ∗  x  =  (  y  ∗  x  )  +  (  z  ∗  x  )  ;    {\displaystyle (y+z)*x=(y*x)+(z*x);}    and the operation      ∗     {\displaystyle \,*\,}   is distributive over      +     {\displaystyle \,+\,}   if it is left- and right-distributive.
When      ∗     {\displaystyle \,*\,}   is commutative , the three conditions above are logically equivalent .
Meaning  The operators used for examples in this section are those of the usual addition       +     {\displaystyle \,+\,}   and multiplication       ⋅  .
{\displaystyle \,\cdot .\,}    If the operation denoted     ⋅    {\displaystyle \cdot }   is not commutative, there is a distinction between left-distributivity and right-distributivity:     a  ⋅   (   b  ±  c   )   =  a  ⋅  b  ±  a  ⋅  c    (left-distributive)     {\displaystyle a\cdot \left(b\pm c\right)=a\cdot b\pm a\cdot c\qquad {\text{ (left-distributive) }}}        (  a  ±  b  )  ⋅  c  =  a  ⋅  c  ±  b  ⋅  c    (right-distributive)   .
{\displaystyle (a\pm b)\cdot c=a\cdot c\pm b\cdot c\qquad {\text{ (right-distributive) }}.}
In either case, the distributive property can be described in words as: To multiply a sum (or difference ) by a factor, each summand (or minuend and subtrahend ) is multiplied by this factor and the resulting products are added (or subtracted).
If the operation outside the parentheses (in this case, the multiplication) is commutative, then left-distributivity implies right-distributivity and vice versa, and one talks simply of distributivity .
One example of an operation that is "only" right-distributive is division, which is not commutative:     (  a  ±  b  )  ÷  c  =  a  ÷  c  ±  b  ÷  c  .
{\displaystyle (a\pm b)\div c=a\div c\pm b\div c.}   In this case, left-distributivity does not apply:     a  ÷  (  b  ±  c  )  ≠  a  ÷  b  ±  a  ÷  c    {\displaystyle a\div (b\pm c)\neq a\div b\pm a\div c}    The distributive laws are among the axioms for rings (like the ring of integers ) and fields (like the field of rational numbers ).
Here multiplication is distributive over addition, but addition is not distributive over multiplication.
Examples of structures with two operations that are each distributive over the other are Boolean algebras such as the algebra of sets or the switching algebra .
Multiplying sums can be put into words as follows: When a sum is multiplied by a sum, multiply each summand of a sum with each summand of the other sum (keeping track of signs) then add up all of the resulting products.
Examples  Real numbers  In the following examples, the use of the distributive law on the set of real numbers      R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   is illustrated.
When multiplication is mentioned in elementary mathematics, it usually refers to this kind of multiplication.
From the point of view of algebra, the real numbers form a field , which ensures the validity of the distributive law.
First example (mental and written multiplication) During mental arithmetic, distributivity is often used unconsciously:     6  ⋅  16  =  6  ⋅  (  10  +  6  )  =  6  ⋅  10  +  6  ⋅  6  =  60  +  36  =  96    {\displaystyle 6\cdot 16=6\cdot (10+6)=6\cdot 10+6\cdot 6=60+36=96}   Thus, to calculate     6  ⋅  16    {\displaystyle 6\cdot 16}   in one's head, one first multiplies     6  ⋅  10    {\displaystyle 6\cdot 10}   and     6  ⋅  6    {\displaystyle 6\cdot 6}   and add the intermediate results.
Written multiplication is also based on the distributive law.
Second example (with variables)      3   a   2    b  ⋅  (  4  a  −  5  b  )  =  3   a   2    b  ⋅  4  a  −  3   a   2    b  ⋅  5  b  =  12   a   3    b  −  15   a   2     b   2      {\displaystyle 3a^{2}b\cdot (4a-5b)=3a^{2}b\cdot 4a-3a^{2}b\cdot 5b=12a^{3}b-15a^{2}b^{2}}     Third example (with two sums)          (  a  +  b  )  ⋅  (  a  −  b  )     =  a  ⋅  (  a  −  b  )  +  b  ⋅  (  a  −  b  )  =   a   2    −  a  b  +  b  a  −   b   2    =   a   2    −   b   2          =  (  a  +  b  )  ⋅  a  −  (  a  +  b  )  ⋅  b  =   a   2    +  b  a  −  a  b  −   b   2    =   a   2    −   b   2          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}(a+b)\cdot (a-b)&=a\cdot (a-b)+b\cdot (a-b)=a^{2}-ab+ba-b^{2}=a^{2}-b^{2}\\&=(a+b)\cdot a-(a+b)\cdot b=a^{2}+ba-ab-b^{2}=a^{2}-b^{2}\\\end{aligned}}}   Here the distributive law was applied twice, and it does not matter which bracket is first multiplied out.
Fourth example Here the distributive law is applied the other way around compared to the previous examples.
Consider     12   a   3     b   2    −  30   a   4    b  c  +  18   a   2     b   3     c   2     .
{\displaystyle 12a^{3}b^{2}-30a^{4}bc+18a^{2}b^{3}c^{2}\,.}
Since the factor     6   a   2    b    {\displaystyle 6a^{2}b}   occurs in all summands, it can be factored out.
That is, due to the distributive law one obtains     12   a   3     b   2    −  30   a   4    b  c  +  18   a   2     b   3     c   2    =  6   a   2    b   (   2  a  b  −  5   a   2    c  +  3   b   2     c   2     )   .
{\displaystyle 12a^{3}b^{2}-30a^{4}bc+18a^{2}b^{3}c^{2}=6a^{2}b\left(2ab-5a^{2}c+3b^{2}c^{2}\right).}
Matrices  The distributive law is valid for matrix multiplication .
More precisely,     (  A  +  B  )  ⋅  C  =  A  ⋅  C  +  B  ⋅  C    {\displaystyle (A+B)\cdot C=A\cdot C+B\cdot C}   for all     l  ×  m    {\displaystyle l\times m}   -matrices     A  ,  B    {\displaystyle A,B}   and     m  ×  n    {\displaystyle m\times n}   -matrices     C  ,    {\displaystyle C,}   as well as     A  ⋅  (  B  +  C  )  =  A  ⋅  B  +  A  ⋅  C    {\displaystyle A\cdot (B+C)=A\cdot B+A\cdot C}   for all     l  ×  m    {\displaystyle l\times m}   -matrices     A    {\displaystyle A}   and     m  ×  n    {\displaystyle m\times n}   -matrices     B  ,  C  .
{\displaystyle B,C.}
Because the commutative property does not hold for matrix multiplication, the second law does not follow from the first law.
In this case, they are two different laws.
Other examples  Multiplication of ordinal numbers , in contrast, is only left-distributive, not right-distributive.
The cross product is left- and right-distributive over vector addition , though not commutative.
The union of sets is distributive over intersection , and intersection is distributive over union.
Logical disjunction ("or") is distributive over logical conjunction ("and"), and vice versa.
For real numbers (and for any totally ordered set ), the maximum operation is distributive over the minimum operation, and vice versa:     max  (  a  ,  min  (  b  ,  c  )  )  =  min  (  max  (  a  ,  b  )  ,  max  (  a  ,  c  )  )    and    min  (  a  ,  max  (  b  ,  c  )  )  =  max  (  min  (  a  ,  b  )  ,  min  (  a  ,  c  )  )  .
{\displaystyle \max(a,\min(b,c))=\min(\max(a,b),\max(a,c))\quad {\text{ and }}\quad \min(a,\max(b,c))=\max(\min(a,b),\min(a,c)).}
For integers , the greatest common divisor is distributive over the least common multiple , and vice versa:     gcd  (  a  ,  lcm  ⁡  (  b  ,  c  )  )  =  lcm  ⁡  (  gcd  (  a  ,  b  )  ,  gcd  (  a  ,  c  )  )    and    lcm  ⁡  (  a  ,  gcd  (  b  ,  c  )  )  =  gcd  (  lcm  ⁡  (  a  ,  b  )  ,  lcm  ⁡  (  a  ,  c  )  )  .
{\displaystyle \gcd(a,\operatorname {lcm} (b,c))=\operatorname {lcm} (\gcd(a,b),\gcd(a,c))\quad {\text{ and }}\quad \operatorname {lcm} (a,\gcd(b,c))=\gcd(\operatorname {lcm} (a,b),\operatorname {lcm} (a,c)).}
For real numbers, addition distributes over the maximum operation, and also over the minimum operation:     a  +  max  (  b  ,  c  )  =  max  (  a  +  b  ,  a  +  c  )    and    a  +  min  (  b  ,  c  )  =  min  (  a  +  b  ,  a  +  c  )  .
{\displaystyle a+\max(b,c)=\max(a+b,a+c)\quad {\text{ and }}\quad a+\min(b,c)=\min(a+b,a+c).}
For binomial multiplication, distribution is sometimes referred to as the FOIL Method  (First terms     a  c  ,    {\displaystyle ac,}   Outer     a  d  ,    {\displaystyle ad,}   Inner     b  c  ,    {\displaystyle bc,}   and Last     b  d    {\displaystyle bd}   ) such as:     (  a  +  b  )  ⋅  (  c  +  d  )  =  a  c  +  a  d  +  b  c  +  b  d  .
{\displaystyle (a+b)\cdot (c+d)=ac+ad+bc+bd.}
In all semirings , including the complex numbers , the quaternions , polynomials , and matrices ,  multiplication distributes over addition:     u  (  v  +  w  )  =  u  v  +  u  w  ,  (  u  +  v  )  w  =  u  w  +  v  w  .
{\displaystyle u(v+w)=uv+uw,(u+v)w=uw+vw.}
In all algebras over a field , including the octonions and other non-associative algebras , multiplication distributes over addition.
Propositional logic  Transformation rules  Propositional calculus  Rules of inference  Implication introduction / elimination ( modus ponens )  Biconditional introduction / elimination  Conjunction introduction / elimination  Disjunction introduction / elimination  Disjunctive / hypothetical syllogism  Constructive / destructive dilemma  Absorption / modus tollens / modus ponendo tollens  Negation introduction   Rules of replacement   Associativity  Commutativity  Distributivity  Double negation  De Morgan's laws  Transposition  Material implication  Exportation  Tautology    Predicate logic  Rules of inference  Universal generalization / instantiation  Existential generalization / instantiation  Rule of replacement  In standard truth-functional propositional logic, distribution   in logical proofs uses two valid rules of replacement to expand individual occurrences of certain logical connectives , within some formula , into separate applications of those connectives across subformulas of the given formula.
The rules are     (  P  ∧  (  Q  ∨  R  )  )  ⇔  (  (  P  ∧  Q  )  ∨  (  P  ∧  R  )  )    and    (  P  ∨  (  Q  ∧  R  )  )  ⇔  (  (  P  ∨  Q  )  ∧  (  P  ∨  R  )  )    {\displaystyle (P\land (Q\lor R))\Leftrightarrow ((P\land Q)\lor (P\land R))\qquad {\text{ and }}\qquad (P\lor (Q\land R))\Leftrightarrow ((P\lor Q)\land (P\lor R))}   where "     ⇔    {\displaystyle \Leftrightarrow }   ", also written      ≡  ,     {\displaystyle \,\equiv ,\,}   is a metalogical  symbol representing "can be replaced in a proof with" or "is logically equivalent to".
Truth functional connectives  Distributivity is a property of some logical connectives of truth-functional propositional logic .
The following logical equivalences demonstrate that distributivity is a property of particular connectives.
The following are truth-functional tautologies .
(  P       ∧      (  Q  ∨  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  ∧  Q  )       ∨  (  P  ∧  R  )  )       Distribution of       conjunction       over       disjunction         (  P       ∨      (  Q  ∧  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  ∨  Q  )       ∧  (  P  ∨  R  )  )       Distribution of       disjunction       over       conjunction         (  P       ∧      (  Q  ∧  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  ∧  Q  )       ∧  (  P  ∧  R  )  )       Distribution of       conjunction       over       conjunction         (  P       ∨      (  Q  ∨  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  ∨  Q  )       ∨  (  P  ∨  R  )  )       Distribution of       disjunction       over       disjunction         (  P      →      (  Q  →  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  →  Q  )      →  (  P  →  R  )  )       Distribution of       implication                       (  P      →      (  Q  ↔  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  →  Q  )      ↔  (  P  →  R  )  )       Distribution of       implication       over       equivalence         (  P      →      (  Q  ∧  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  →  Q  )       ∧  (  P  →  R  )  )       Distribution of       implication       over       conjunction         (  P       ∨      (  Q  ↔  R  )  )       ⇔       (  (  P  ∨  Q  )      ↔  (  P  ∨  R  )  )       Distribution of       disjunction       over       equivalence         {\displaystyle {\begin{alignedat}{13}&(P&&\;\land &&(Q\lor R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\land Q)&&\;\lor (P\land R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ conjunction }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ disjunction }}\\&(P&&\;\lor &&(Q\land R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\lor Q)&&\;\land (P\lor R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ disjunction }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ conjunction }}\\&(P&&\;\land &&(Q\land R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\land Q)&&\;\land (P\land R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ conjunction }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ conjunction }}\\&(P&&\;\lor &&(Q\lor R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\lor Q)&&\;\lor (P\lor R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ disjunction }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ disjunction }}\\&(P&&\to &&(Q\to R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\to Q)&&\to (P\to R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ implication }}&&{\text{  }}&&{\text{  }}\\&(P&&\to &&(Q\leftrightarrow R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\to Q)&&\leftrightarrow (P\to R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ implication }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ equivalence }}\\&(P&&\to &&(Q\land R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\to Q)&&\;\land (P\to R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ implication }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ conjunction }}\\&(P&&\;\lor &&(Q\leftrightarrow R))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&((P\lor Q)&&\leftrightarrow (P\lor R))&&\quad {\text{ Distribution of }}&&{\text{ disjunction }}&&{\text{ over }}&&{\text{ equivalence }}\\\end{alignedat}}}    Double distribution            (  (  P  ∧  Q  )       ∨  (  R  ∧  S  )  )       ⇔       (  (  (  P  ∨  R  )  ∧  (  P  ∨  S  )  )       ∧  (  (  Q  ∨  R  )  ∧  (  Q  ∨  S  )  )  )          (  (  P  ∨  Q  )       ∧  (  R  ∨  S  )  )       ⇔       (  (  (  P  ∧  R  )  ∨  (  P  ∧  S  )  )       ∨  (  (  Q  ∧  R  )  ∨  (  Q  ∧  S  )  )  )          {\displaystyle {\begin{alignedat}{13}&((P\land Q)&&\;\lor (R\land S))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&(((P\lor R)\land (P\lor S))&&\;\land ((Q\lor R)\land (Q\lor S)))&&\\&((P\lor Q)&&\;\land (R\lor S))&&\;\Leftrightarrow \;&&(((P\land R)\lor (P\land S))&&\;\lor ((Q\land R)\lor (Q\land S)))&&\\\end{alignedat}}}    Distributivity and rounding  In approximate arithmetic, such as floating-point arithmetic , the distributive property of multiplication (and division) over addition may fail because of the limitations of arithmetic precision .
For example, the identity     1   /   3  +  1   /   3  +  1   /   3  =  (  1  +  1  +  1  )   /   3    {\displaystyle 1/3+1/3+1/3=(1+1+1)/3}   fails in decimal arithmetic , regardless of the number of significant digits .
Methods such as banker's rounding may help in some cases, as may increasing the precision used, but ultimately some calculation errors are inevitable.
In rings and other structures  Distributivity is most commonly found in semirings , notably the particular cases of rings and distributive lattices .
A semiring has two binary operations, commonly denoted      +     {\displaystyle \,+\,}   and      ∗  ,    {\displaystyle \,*,}   and requires that      ∗     {\displaystyle \,*\,}   must distribute over      +  .
{\displaystyle \,+.}
A ring is a semiring with additive inverses.
A lattice is another kind of algebraic structure with two binary operations,      ∧   and   ∨  .
{\displaystyle \,\land {\text{ and }}\lor .}
If either of these operations distributes over the other (say      ∧     {\displaystyle \,\land \,}   distributes over      ∨    {\displaystyle \,\lor }   ), then the reverse also holds (      ∨     {\displaystyle \,\lor \,}   distributes over      ∧     {\displaystyle \,\land \,}   ), and the lattice is called distributive.
See also Distributivity (order theory) .
A Boolean algebra can be interpreted either as a special kind of ring (a Boolean ring ) or a special kind of distributive lattice (a Boolean lattice ).
Each interpretation is responsible for different distributive laws in the Boolean algebra.
Similar structures without distributive laws are near-rings and near-fields instead of rings and division rings .
The operations are usually defined to be distributive on the right but not on the left.
Generalizations   In several mathematical areas, generalized distributivity laws are considered.
This may involve the weakening of the above conditions or the extension to infinitary operations.
Especially in order theory one finds numerous important variants of distributivity, some of which include infinitary operations, such as the infinite distributive law ; others being defined in the presence of only one binary operation, such as the according definitions and their relations are given in the article distributivity (order theory) .
This also includes the notion of a completely distributive lattice .
In the presence of an ordering relation, one can also weaken the above equalities by replacing      =     {\displaystyle \,=\,}   by either      ≤     {\displaystyle \,\leq \,}   or      ≥  .
{\displaystyle \,\geq .}
Naturally, this will lead to meaningful concepts only in some situations.
An application of this principle is the notion of sub-distributivity as explained in the article on interval arithmetic .
In category theory , if     (  S  ,  μ  ,  ν  )    {\displaystyle (S,\mu ,\nu )}   and      (    S   ′    ,   μ   ′    ,   ν   ′     )     {\displaystyle \left(S^{\prime },\mu ^{\prime },\nu ^{\prime }\right)}   are monads on a category      C  ,    {\displaystyle C,}   a distributive law      S  .
S   ′    →   S   ′    .
S    {\displaystyle S.S^{\prime }\to S^{\prime }.S}   is a natural transformation      λ  :  S  .
S    {\displaystyle \lambda :S.S^{\prime }\to S^{\prime }.S}   such that      (    S   ′    ,  λ   )     {\displaystyle \left(S^{\prime },\lambda \right)}   is a lax map of monads      S  →  S    {\displaystyle S\to S}   and     (  S  ,  λ  )    {\displaystyle (S,\lambda )}   is a colax map of monads       S   ′    →   S   ′    .
{\displaystyle S^{\prime }\to S^{\prime }.}
This is exactly the data needed to define a monad structure on      S   ′    .
S    {\displaystyle S^{\prime }.S}   : the multiplication map is      S   ′    μ  .
μ   ′     S   2    .
S   ′    λ  S    {\displaystyle S^{\prime }\mu .\mu ^{\prime }S^{2}.S^{\prime }\lambda S}   and the unit map is      η   ′    S  .
η  .
{\displaystyle \eta ^{\prime }S.\eta .}
See: distributive law between monads .
A generalized distributive law has also been proposed in the area of information theory .
Antidistributivity  The ubiquitous identity that relates inverses to the binary operation in any group , namely     (  x  y   )   −  1    =   y   −  1     x   −  1    ,    {\displaystyle (xy)^{-1}=y^{-1}x^{-1},}   which is taken as an axiom in the more general context of a semigroup with involution , has sometimes been called an antidistributive property (of inversion as a unary operation ).
In the context of a near-ring , which removes the commutativity of the additively written group and assumes only one-sided distributivity, one can speak of (two-sided) distributive elements but also of antidistributive elements .
The latter reverse the order of (the non-commutative) addition; assuming a left-nearring (i.e.
one which all elements distribute when multiplied on the left), then an antidistributive element     a    {\displaystyle a}   reverses the order of addition when multiplied to the right:     (  x  +  y  )  a  =  y  a  +  x  a  .
{\displaystyle (x+y)a=ya+xa.}
In the study of propositional logic and Boolean algebra , the term antidistributive law is sometimes used to denote the interchange between conjunction and disjunction when implication factors over them:       (  a  ∨  b  )  ⇒  c  ≡  (  a  ⇒  c  )  ∧  (  b  ⇒  c  )    {\displaystyle (a\lor b)\Rightarrow c\equiv (a\Rightarrow c)\land (b\Rightarrow c)}        (  a  ∧  b  )  ⇒  c  ≡  (  a  ⇒  c  )  ∨  (  b  ⇒  c  )  .
{\displaystyle (a\land b)\Rightarrow c\equiv (a\Rightarrow c)\lor (b\Rightarrow c).}
These two tautologies are a direct consequence of the duality in De Morgan's laws .
Notes     ^  Distributivity of Binary Operations from Mathonline   ^  Kim Steward (2011) Multiplying Polynomials from Virtual Math Lab at West Texas A&M University   ^  Elliott Mendelson (1964) Introduction to Mathematical Logic , page 21, D.
Van Nostrand Company   ^  Alfred Tarski (1941) Introduction to Logic , page 52, Oxford University Press   ^  Chris Brink; Wolfram Kahl; Gunther Schmidt (1997).
Relational Methods in Computer Science .
ISBN  978-3-211-82971-4 .
^  Celestina Cotti Ferrero; Giovanni Ferrero (2002).
Nearrings: Some Developments Linked to Semigroups and Groups .
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
62 and 67.
ISBN  978-1-4613-0267-4 .
^  Eric C.R.
Hehner (1993).
A Practical Theory of Programming .
Springer Science & Business Media.
p.
230.
ISBN  978-1-4419-8596-5 .
External links     Look up distributivity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
A demonstration of the Distributive Law for integer arithmetic (from cut-the-knot )  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Distributive_property&oldid=1214504050 " Page notice  You are not logged in.
The shorter phrase "proof by induction" is often used instead of "proof by mathematical induction".<ref> {{Webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120218033011/http://www.warwick.ac.uk/AEAhelp/glossary/glossaryParser.php?glossaryFile=Proof%20by%20induction.htm |date=February 18, 2012 }}, University of Warwick Glossary of Mathematical Terminology</ref>  Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Logical connective  "Logical conditional" redirects here.
For other related meanings, see Conditional statement .
Not to be confused with Material inference or Material implication (rule of inference) .
Material conditional IMPLY Definition     x  →  y    {\displaystyle x\rightarrow y}   Truth table     (  1011  )    {\displaystyle (1011)}   Logic gate Normal forms Disjunctive       x  ¯    +  y    {\displaystyle {\overline {x}}+y}   Conjunctive       x  ¯    +  y    {\displaystyle {\overline {x}}+y}   Zhegalkin polynomial     1  ⊕  x  ⊕  x  y    {\displaystyle 1\oplus x\oplus xy}   Post's lattices 0-preserving no 1-preserving yes Monotone no Affine no v t e  Logical connectives   AND      A  ∧  B    {\displaystyle A\land B}   ,     A  ⋅  B    {\displaystyle A\cdot B}   ,     A  B    {\displaystyle AB}   ,     A  &  B    {\displaystyle A\&B}   ,     A  &  &  B    {\displaystyle A\&\&B}    equivalent      A  ≡  B    {\displaystyle A\equiv B}   ,     A  ⇔  B    {\displaystyle A\Leftrightarrow B}   ,     A  ⇋  B    {\displaystyle A\leftrightharpoons B}    implies      A  ⇒  B    {\displaystyle A\Rightarrow B}   ,     A  ⊃  B    {\displaystyle A\supset B}   ,     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\rightarrow B}    NAND      A    ∧  ¯    B    {\displaystyle A{\overline {\land }}B}   ,     A  ↑  B    {\displaystyle A\uparrow B}   ,     A  ∣  B    {\displaystyle A\mid B}   ,        A  ⋅  B   ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {A\cdot B}}}   nonequivalent      A  ≢  B    {\displaystyle A\not \equiv B}   ,     A  ⇎  B    {\displaystyle A\not \Leftrightarrow B}   ,     A  ↮  B    {\displaystyle A\nleftrightarrow B}    NOR      A    ∨  ¯    B    {\displaystyle A{\overline {\lor }}B}   ,     A  ↓  B    {\displaystyle A\downarrow B}   ,        A  +  B   ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {A+B}}}    NOT      ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg A}   ,     −  A    {\displaystyle -A}   ,       A  ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {A}}}   ,     ∼  A    {\displaystyle \sim A}    OR      A  ∨  B    {\displaystyle A\lor B}   ,     A  +  B    {\displaystyle A+B}   ,     A  ∣  B    {\displaystyle A\mid B}   ,     A  ∥  B    {\displaystyle A\parallel B}    XNOR      A     XNOR     B    {\displaystyle A\ {\text{XNOR}}\ B}    XOR      A    ∨  _    B    {\displaystyle A{\underline {\lor }}B}   ,     A  ⊕  B    {\displaystyle A\oplus B}    converse      A  ⇐  B    {\displaystyle A\Leftarrow B}   ,     A  ⊂  B    {\displaystyle A\subset B}   ,     A  ←  B    {\displaystyle A\leftarrow B}    Related concepts  Propositional calculus Predicate logic Boolean algebra Truth table Truth function Boolean function Functional completeness  Applications  Digital logic Programming languages Mathematical logic Philosophy of logic    Category v t e  The material conditional (also known as material implication ) is an operation commonly used in logic .
When the conditional symbol     →    {\displaystyle \rightarrow }   is interpreted as material implication, a formula     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   is true unless     P    {\displaystyle P}   is true and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   is false.
Material implication can also be characterized inferentially by modus ponens , modus tollens , conditional proof , and classical reductio ad absurdum .
Material implication is used in all the basic systems of classical logic as well as some nonclassical logics .
It is assumed as a model of correct conditional reasoning within mathematics and serves as the basis for commands in many programming languages .
However, many logics replace material implication with other operators such as the strict conditional and the variably strict conditional .
Due to the paradoxes of material implication and related problems, material implication is not generally considered a viable analysis of conditional sentences in natural language .
Notation   In logic and related fields, the material conditional is customarily notated with an infix operator     →    {\displaystyle \to }   .
The material conditional is also notated using the infixes     ⊃    {\displaystyle \supset }   and     ⇒    {\displaystyle \Rightarrow }   .
In the prefixed Polish notation , conditionals are notated as     C  p  q    {\displaystyle Cpq}   .
In a conditional formula     p  →  q    {\displaystyle p\to q}   , the subformula     p    {\displaystyle p}   is referred to as the antecedent and     q    {\displaystyle q}   is termed the consequent of the conditional.
Conditional statements may be nested such that the antecedent or the consequent may themselves be conditional statements, as in the formula     (  p  →  q  )  →  (  r  →  s  )    {\displaystyle (p\to q)\to (r\to s)}   .
History   In Arithmetices Principia: Nova Methodo Exposita (1889), Peano expressed the proposition "If     A    {\displaystyle A}   then     B    {\displaystyle B}   " as     A    {\displaystyle A}   Ɔ     B    {\displaystyle B}   with the symbol Ɔ, which is the opposite of C.
 He also expressed the proposition     A  ⊃  B    {\displaystyle A\supset B}   as     A    {\displaystyle A}   Ɔ     B    {\displaystyle B}   .
Hilbert expressed the proposition "If A then B" as     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}   in 1918.
Russell followed Peano in his Principia Mathematica (1910–1913), in which he expressed the proposition "If A then B" as     A  ⊃  B    {\displaystyle A\supset B}   .
Following Russell, Gentzen expressed the proposition "If A then B" as     A  ⊃  B    {\displaystyle A\supset B}   .
Heyting expressed the proposition "If A then B" as     A  ⊃  B    {\displaystyle A\supset B}   at first but later came to express it as     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}   with a right-pointing arrow.
Bourbaki expressed the proposition "If A then B" as     A  ⇒  B    {\displaystyle A\Rightarrow B}   in 1954.
Definitions   Semantics   From a classical  semantic perspective , material implication is the binary  truth functional operator which returns "true" unless its first argument is true and its second argument is false.
This semantics can be shown graphically in a truth table such as the one below.
One can also consider the equivalence     A  →  B  ≡  ¬  (  A  ∧  ¬  B  )  ≡  ¬  A  ∨  B    {\displaystyle A\to B\equiv \neg (A\land \neg B)\equiv \neg A\lor B}   .
Truth table   The truth table of     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\rightarrow B}   :      A    {\displaystyle A}       B    {\displaystyle B}       A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\rightarrow B}   F F T F T T T F F T T T  The logical cases where the antecedent A is false and A → B is true, are called " vacuous truths ".
Examples are ...
 ...
with B false: "If Marie Curie is a sister of Galileo Galilei , then Galileo Galilei is a brother of Marie Curie" ,  ...
with B true: "If Marie Curie is a sister of Galileo Galilei , then Marie Curie has a sibling."
Deductive definition   Material implication can also be characterized deductively in terms of the following rules of inference .
Modus ponens  Conditional proof  Classical contraposition  Classical reductio ad absurdum  Unlike the semantic definition, this approach to logical connectives permits the examination of structurally identical propositional forms in various logical systems , where somewhat different properties may be demonstrated.
For example, in intuitionistic logic , which rejects proofs by contraposition as valid rules of inference,     (  A  →  B  )  ⇒  ¬  A  ∨  B    {\displaystyle (A\to B)\Rightarrow \neg A\lor B}   is not a propositional theorem, but the material conditional is used to define negation .
Formal properties   This section needs expansion .
( February 2021 )  When disjunction , conjunction and negation are classical, material implication validates the following equivalences:  Contraposition:     P  →  Q  ≡  ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle P\to Q\equiv \neg Q\to \neg P}    Import-export :     P  →  (  Q  →  R  )  ≡  (  P  ∧  Q  )  →  R    {\displaystyle P\to (Q\to R)\equiv (P\land Q)\to R}    Negated conditionals:     ¬  (  P  →  Q  )  ≡  P  ∧  ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \neg (P\to Q)\equiv P\land \neg Q}    Or-and-if:     P  →  Q  ≡  ¬  P  ∨  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q\equiv \neg P\lor Q}    Commutativity of antecedents:       (    P  →  (  Q  →  R  )    )    ≡    (    Q  →  (  P  →  R  )    )      {\displaystyle {\big (}P\to (Q\to R){\big )}\equiv {\big (}Q\to (P\to R){\big )}}    Left distributivity :       (    R  →  (  P  →  Q  )    )    ≡    (    (  R  →  P  )  →  (  R  →  Q  )    )      {\displaystyle {\big (}R\to (P\to Q){\big )}\equiv {\big (}(R\to P)\to (R\to Q){\big )}}    Similarly, on classical interpretations of the other connectives, material implication validates the following entailments :  Antecedent strengthening:     P  →  Q  ⊨  (  P  ∧  R  )  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q\models (P\land R)\to Q}    Vacuous conditional :     ¬  P  ⊨  P  →  Q    {\displaystyle \neg P\models P\to Q}    Transitivity :     (  P  →  Q  )  ∧  (  Q  →  R  )  ⊨  P  →  R    {\displaystyle (P\to Q)\land (Q\to R)\models P\to R}    Simplification of disjunctive antecedents :     (  P  ∨  Q  )  →  R  ⊨  (  P  →  R  )  ∧  (  Q  →  R  )    {\displaystyle (P\lor Q)\to R\models (P\to R)\land (Q\to R)}    Tautologies involving material implication include:  Reflexivity :     ⊨  P  →  P    {\displaystyle \models P\to P}    Totality :     ⊨  (  P  →  Q  )  ∨  (  Q  →  P  )    {\displaystyle \models (P\to Q)\lor (Q\to P)}    Conditional excluded middle :     ⊨  (  P  →  Q  )  ∨  (  P  →  ¬  Q  )    {\displaystyle \models (P\to Q)\lor (P\to \neg Q)}    Discrepancies with natural language   Material implication does not closely match the usage of conditional sentences in natural language .
For example, even though material conditionals with false antecedents are vacuously true , the natural language statement "If 8 is odd, then 3 is prime" is typically judged false.
Similarly, any material conditional with a true consequent is itself true, but speakers typically reject sentences such as "If I have a penny in my pocket, then Paris is in France".
These classic problems have been called the paradoxes of material implication .
In addition to the paradoxes, a variety of other arguments have been given against a material implication analysis.
For instance, counterfactual conditionals would all be vacuously true on such an account.
In the mid-20th century, a number of researchers including H.
P.
Grice and Frank Jackson proposed that pragmatic principles could explain the discrepancies between natural language conditionals and the material conditional.
On their accounts, conditionals denote material implication but end up conveying additional information when they interact with conversational norms such as Grice's maxims .
Recent work in formal semantics and philosophy of language has generally eschewed material implication as an analysis for natural-language conditionals.
In particular, such work has often rejected the assumption that natural-language conditionals are truth functional in the sense that the truth value of "If P , then Q " is determined solely by the truth values of P and Q .
Thus semantic analyses of conditionals typically propose alternative interpretations built on foundations such as modal logic , relevance logic , probability theory , and causal models .
Similar discrepancies have been observed by psychologists studying conditional reasoning, for instance, by the notorious Wason selection task study, where less than 10% of participants reasoned according to the material conditional.
Some researchers have interpreted this result as a failure of the participants to conform to normative laws of reasoning, while others interpret the participants as reasoning normatively according to nonclassical laws.
Set that is not a finite set  This article needs additional citations for verification .
Find sources:  "Infinite set" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Set Theory Image  In set theory , an infinite set is a set that is not a finite set .
Infinite sets may be countable or uncountable .
Properties   The set of natural numbers (whose existence is postulated by the axiom of infinity ) is infinite.
It is the only set that is directly required by the axioms to be infinite.
The existence of any other infinite set can be proved in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC), but only by showing that it follows from the existence of the natural numbers.
A set is infinite if and only if for every natural number, the set has a subset whose cardinality is that natural number.
If the axiom of choice holds, then a set is infinite if and only if it includes a countable infinite subset.
If a set of sets is infinite or contains an infinite element, then its union is infinite.
The power set of an infinite set is infinite.
Any superset of an infinite set is infinite.
If an infinite set is partitioned into finitely many subsets, then at least one of them must be infinite.
Any set which can be mapped onto an infinite set is infinite.
The Cartesian product of an infinite set and a nonempty set is infinite.
The Cartesian product of an infinite number of sets, each containing at least two elements, is either empty or infinite; if the axiom of choice holds, then it is infinite.
If an infinite set is a well-ordered set , then it must have a nonempty, nontrivial subset that has no greatest element.
In ZF, a set is infinite if and only if the power set of its power set is a Dedekind-infinite set , having a proper subset equinumerous to itself.
If the axiom of choice is also true, then infinite sets are precisely the Dedekind-infinite sets.
If an infinite set is a well-orderable set , then it has many well-orderings which are non-isomorphic.
History   Important ideas discussed by David Burton in his book The History of Mathematics: An Introduction include how to define "elements" or parts of a set, how to define unique elements in the set, and how to prove infinity.
Burton also discusses proofs for different types of infinity, including countable and uncountable sets.
Topics used when comparing infinite and finite sets include ordered sets , cardinality, equivalency, coordinate planes , universal sets , mapping, subsets, continuity, and transcendence .
Cantor's set ideas were influenced by trigonometry and irrational numbers.
Other key ideas in infinite set theory mentioned by Burton, Paula, Narli and Rodger include real numbers such as π , integers, and Euler's number .
Both Burton and Rogers use finite sets to start to explain infinite sets using proof concepts such as mapping, proof by induction, or proof by contradiction.
Mathematical trees can also be used to understand infinite sets.
Burton also discusses proofs of infinite sets including ideas such as unions and subsets.
In Chapter 12 of The History of Mathematics: An Introduction , Burton emphasizes how mathematicians such as Zermelo , Dedekind , Galileo , Kronecker , Cantor, and Bolzano investigated and influenced infinite set theory.
Many of these mathematicians either debated infinity or otherwise added to the ideas of infinite sets.
Potential historical influences, such as how Prussia's history in the 1800s, resulted in an increase in scholarly mathematical knowledge, including Cantor's theory of infinite sets.
One potential application of infinite set theory is in genetics and biology.
Examples   Countably infinite sets   The set of all integers , {..., -1, 0, 1, 2, ...} is a countably infinite set.
The set of all even integers is also a countably infinite set, even if it is a proper subset of the integers.
The set of all rational numbers is a countably infinite set as there is a bijection to the set of integers.
Uncountably infinite sets   The set of all real numbers is an uncountably infinite set.
The set of all irrational numbers is also an uncountably infinite set.
Mathematical proof technique using contradiction  In mathematics , a proof by infinite descent , also known as Fermat's method of descent, is a particular kind of proof by contradiction  used to show that a statement cannot possibly hold for any number, by showing that if the statement were to hold for a number, then the same would be true for a smaller number, leading to an infinite descent and ultimately a contradiction.
It is a method which relies on the well-ordering principle , and is often used to show that a given equation, such as a Diophantine equation , has no solutions.
Typically, one shows that if a solution to a problem existed, which in some sense was related to one or more natural numbers , it would necessarily imply that a second solution existed, which was related to one or more 'smaller' natural numbers.
This in turn would imply a third solution related to smaller natural numbers, implying a fourth solution, therefore a fifth solution, and so on.
However, there cannot be an infinity of ever-smaller natural numbers, and therefore by mathematical induction , the original premise—that any solution exists—is incorrect: its correctness produces a contradiction .
An alternative way to express this is to assume one or more solutions or examples exists, from which a smallest solution or example—a minimal counterexample —can then be inferred.
Once there, one would try to prove that if a smallest solution exists, then it must imply the existence of a smaller solution (in some sense), which again proves that the existence of any solution would lead to a contradiction.
The earliest uses of the method of infinite descent appear in Euclid's Elements .
A typical example is Proposition 31 of Book 7, in which Euclid proves that every composite integer is divided (in Euclid's terminology "measured") by some prime number.
The method was much later developed by Fermat , who coined the term and often used it for Diophantine equations .
Two typical examples are showing the non-solvability of the Diophantine equation      r   2    +   s   4    =   t   4      {\displaystyle r^{2}+s^{4}=t^{4}}   and proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares , which states that an odd prime p can be expressed as a sum of two squares when     p  ≡  1    (  mod   4  )     {\displaystyle p\equiv 1{\pmod {4}}}   (see Modular arithmetic and proof by infinite descent ).
In this way Fermat was able to show the non-existence of solutions in many cases of Diophantine equations of classical interest (for example, the problem of four perfect squares in arithmetic progression ).
In some cases, to the modern eye, his "method of infinite descent" is an exploitation of the inversion of the doubling function for rational points on an elliptic curve  E .
The context is of a hypothetical non-trivial rational point on E .
Doubling a point on E roughly doubles the length of the numbers required to write it (as number of digits), so that a "halving" a point gives a rational with smaller terms.
Since the terms are positive, they cannot decrease forever.
Number theory   In the number theory of the twentieth century, the infinite descent method was taken up again, and pushed to a point where it connected with the main thrust of algebraic number theory and the study of L-functions .
The structural result of Mordell , that the rational points on an elliptic curve E form a finitely-generated abelian group , used an infinite descent argument based on E /2 E in Fermat's style.
To extend this to the case of an abelian variety  A , André Weil had to make more explicit the way of quantifying the size of a solution, by means of a height function – a concept that became foundational.
To show that A ( Q )/2 A ( Q ) is finite, which is certainly a necessary condition for the finite generation of the group A ( Q ) of rational points of A , one must do calculations in what later was recognised as Galois cohomology .
In this way, abstractly-defined cohomology groups in the theory become identified with descents in the tradition of Fermat.
The Mordell–Weil theorem was at the start of what later became a very extensive theory.
Application examples   Irrationality of √ 2   The proof that the square root of 2 ( √ 2 ) is irrational (i.e.
cannot be expressed as a fraction of two whole numbers) was discovered by the ancient Greeks , and is perhaps the earliest known example of a proof by infinite descent.
The square root of two is occasionally called "Pythagoras' number" or "Pythagoras' Constant", for example Conway & Guy (1996) .
The ancient Greeks , not having algebra , worked out a geometric proof by infinite descent ( John Horton Conway presented another geometric proof by infinite descent that may be more accessible  ).
The following is an algebraic proof along similar lines: Suppose that √ 2 were rational .
Then it could be written as        2    =    p  q      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}={\frac {p}{q}}}    for two natural numbers, p and q .
Then squaring would give      2  =     p   2     q   2      ,    {\displaystyle 2={\frac {p^{2}}{q^{2}}},}        2   q   2    =   p   2    ,    {\displaystyle 2q^{2}=p^{2},}    so 2 must divide p 2 .
Because 2 is a prime number , it must also divide p , by Euclid's lemma .
So p = 2 r , for some integer r .
But then,      2   q   2    =  (  2  r   )   2    =  4   r   2    ,    {\displaystyle 2q^{2}=(2r)^{2}=4r^{2},}         q   2    =  2   r   2    ,    {\displaystyle q^{2}=2r^{2},}    which shows that 2 must divide q as well.
So q = 2 s for some integer s .
This gives        p  q    =     2  r    2  s     =    r  s      {\displaystyle {\frac {p}{q}}={\frac {2r}{2s}}={\frac {r}{s}}}   .
Therefore, if √ 2 could be written as a rational number, then it could always be written as a rational number with smaller parts, which itself could be written with yet-smaller parts, ad infinitum .
But this is impossible in the set of natural numbers .
Since √ 2 is a real number , which can be either rational or irrational, the only option left is for √ 2 to be irrational.
(Alternatively, this proves that if √ 2 were rational, no "smallest" representation as a fraction could exist, as any attempt to find a "smallest" representation p / q would imply that a smaller one existed, which is a similar contradiction.)
Irrationality of √ k if it is not an integer   For positive integer k , suppose that √ k is not an integer, but is rational and can be expressed as m / n for natural numbers m and n , and let q be the largest integer less than √ k (that is, q is the floor of √ k ).
Then            k       =    m  n          =     m   (     k    −  q   )     n   (     k    −  q   )            =     m    k    −  m  q    n    k    −  n  q           =      (   n    k     )     k    −  m  q    n   (    m  n    )   −  n  q           =     n  k  −  m  q    m  −  n  q           {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\sqrt {k}}&={\frac {m}{n}}\\&={\frac {m\left({\sqrt {k}}-q\right)}{n\left({\sqrt {k}}-q\right)}}\\&={\frac {m{\sqrt {k}}-mq}{n{\sqrt {k}}-nq}}\\&={\frac {\left(n{\sqrt {k}}\right){\sqrt {k}}-mq}{n\left({\frac {m}{n}}\right)-nq}}\\&={\frac {nk-mq}{m-nq}}\end{aligned}}}    The numerator and denominator were each multiplied by the expression ( √ k − q )—which is positive but less than 1—and then simplified independently.
So, the resulting products, say m′ and n′ , are themselves integers, and are less than m and n respectively.
Therefore, no matter what natural numbers m and n are used to express √ k , there exist smaller natural numbers m′ < m and n′ < n that have the same ratio.
But infinite descent on the natural numbers is impossible, so this disproves the original assumption that √ k could be expressed as a ratio of natural numbers.
Non-solvability of r 2 + s 4 = t 4 and its permutations   See also: Fermat's right triangle theorem § Fermat's proof  The non-solvability of      r   2    +   s   4    =   t   4      {\displaystyle r^{2}+s^{4}=t^{4}}   in integers is sufficient to show the non-solvability of      q   4    +   s   4    =   t   4      {\displaystyle q^{4}+s^{4}=t^{4}}   in integers, which is a special case of Fermat's Last Theorem , and the historical proofs of the latter proceeded by more broadly proving the former using infinite descent.
The following more recent proof demonstrates both of these impossibilities by proving still more broadly that a Pythagorean triangle cannot have any two of its sides each either a square or twice a square, since there is no smallest such triangle:   Suppose there exists such a Pythagorean triangle.
Then it can be scaled down to give a primitive (i.e., with no common factors other than 1) Pythagorean triangle with the same property.
Primitive Pythagorean triangles' sides can be written as     x  =  2  a  b  ,    {\displaystyle x=2ab,}        y  =   a   2    −   b   2    ,    {\displaystyle y=a^{2}-b^{2},}        z  =   a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle z=a^{2}+b^{2}}   , with a and b  relatively prime and with a+b odd and hence y and z both odd.
The property that y and z are each odd means that neither y nor z can be twice a square.
Furthermore, if x is a square or twice a square, then each of a and b is a square or twice a square.
There are three cases, depending on which two sides are postulated to each be a square or twice a square:  y and z : In this case y and z are both squares.
But then the right triangle with legs       y  z      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {yz}}}   and      b   2      {\displaystyle b^{2}}   and hypotenuse      a   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}}   also would have integer sides including a square leg (      b   2      {\displaystyle b^{2}}   ) and a square hypotenuse (      a   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}}   ), and would have a smaller hypotenuse (      a   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}}   compared to     z  =   a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle z=a^{2}+b^{2}}   ).
z and x : z is a square.
The integer right triangle with legs     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   and hypotenuse       z      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {z}}}   also would have two sides (     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   ) each of which is a square or twice a square, and a smaller hypotenuse (       z      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {z}}}   compared to     z    {\displaystyle z}   ) .
y and x : y is a square.
The integer right triangle with legs     b    {\displaystyle b}   and       y      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {y}}}   and hypotenuse     a    {\displaystyle a}   would have two sides ( b and a ) each of which is a square or twice a square, with a smaller hypotenuse than the original triangle (     a    {\displaystyle a}   compared to     z  =   a   2    +   b   2      {\displaystyle z=a^{2}+b^{2}}   ).
In any of these cases, one Pythagorean triangle with two sides each of which is a square or twice a square has led to a smaller one, which in turn would lead to a smaller one, etc.
; since such a sequence cannot go on infinitely, the original premise that such a triangle exists must be wrong.
This implies that the equations       r   2    +   s   4    =   t   4    ,    {\displaystyle r^{2}+s^{4}=t^{4},}         r   4    +   s   2    =   t   4    ,    {\displaystyle r^{4}+s^{2}=t^{4},}   and       r   4    +   s   4    =   t   2      {\displaystyle r^{4}+s^{4}=t^{2}}    cannot have non-trivial solutions, since non-trivial solutions would give Pythagorean triangles with two sides being squares.
For other similar proofs by infinite descent for the n = 4 case of Fermat's Theorem, see the articles by Grant and Perella  and Barbara.
Number used for counting  This article is about "positive integers" and "non-negative integers".
For all the numbers ..., −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, ..., see Integer .
Natural numbers can be used for counting: one apple; two apples are one apple added to another apple, three apples are one apple added to two apples, ...
In mathematics , the natural numbers are the numbers 1, 2, 3, etc., possibly including 0 as well.
Some definitions, including the standard ISO 80000-2 ,  begin the natural numbers with 0 , corresponding to the non-negative integers  0, 1, 2, 3, ...
, whereas others start with 1 , corresponding to the positive integers  1, 2, 3, ...
  Texts that exclude zero from the natural numbers sometimes refer to the natural numbers together with zero as the whole numbers , while in other writings, that term is used instead for the integers (including negative integers).
In common language, particularly in primary school education, natural numbers may be called counting numbers  to intuitively exclude the negative integers and zero, and also to contrast the discreteness of counting to the continuity of measurement —a hallmark characteristic of real numbers .
The natural numbers can be used for counting (as in "there are six coins on the table"), in which case they serve as cardinal numbers .
They may also be used for ordering (as in "this is the third largest city in the country"), in which case they serve as ordinal numbers .
Natural numbers are sometimes used as labels—also known as nominal numbers , (e.g.
jersey numbers in sports)—which do not have the properties of numbers in a mathematical sense.
The natural numbers form a set , often symbolized as      N     {\textstyle \mathbb {N} }   .
Many other number sets are built by successively extending the set of natural numbers: the integers , by including an additive identity 0 (if not yet in) and an additive inverse  − n for each nonzero natural number n ; the rational numbers , by including a multiplicative inverse      1   /   n    {\displaystyle 1/n}   for each nonzero integer n (and also the product of these inverses by integers); the real numbers by including the limits of Cauchy sequences  of rationals; the complex numbers , by adjoining to the real numbers a square root of −1 (and also the sums and products thereof); and so on.
This chain of extensions canonically embeds the natural numbers in the other number systems.
Properties of the natural numbers, such as divisibility and the distribution of prime numbers , are studied in number theory .
Problems concerning counting and ordering, such as partitioning and enumerations , are studied in combinatorics .
History   Ancient roots   Further information: Prehistoric counting  The Ishango bone (on exhibition at the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences )    is believed to have been used 20,000 years ago for natural number arithmetic.
The most primitive method of representing a natural number is to use one's fingers, as in finger counting .
Putting down a tally mark for each object is another primitive method.
Later, a set of objects could be tested for equality, excess or shortage—by striking out a mark and removing an object from the set.
The first major advance in abstraction was the use of numerals to represent numbers.
This allowed systems to be developed for recording large numbers.
The ancient Egyptians developed a powerful system of numerals with distinct hieroglyphs for 1, 10, and all powers of 10 up to over 1 million.
A stone carving from Karnak , dating back from around 1500 BCE and now at the Louvre in Paris, depicts 276 as 2 hundreds, 7 tens, and 6 ones; and similarly for the number 4,622.
The Babylonians had a place-value system based essentially on the numerals for 1 and 10, using base sixty, so that the symbol for sixty was the same as the symbol for one—its value being determined from context.
A much later advance was the development of the idea that 0 can be considered as a number, with its own numeral.
The use of a 0 digit in place-value notation (within other numbers) dates back as early as 700 BCE by the Babylonians, who omitted such a digit when it would have been the last symbol in the number.
The Olmec and Maya civilizations used 0 as a separate number as early as the 1st century BCE , but this usage did not spread beyond Mesoamerica .
The use of a numeral 0 in modern times originated with the Indian mathematician Brahmagupta in 628 CE.
However, 0 had been used as a number in the medieval computus (the calculation of the date of Easter), beginning with Dionysius Exiguus in 525 CE, without being denoted by a numeral.
Standard Roman numerals do not have a symbol for 0; instead, nulla (or the genitive form nullae ) from nullus , the Latin word for "none", was employed to denote a 0 value.
The first systematic study of numbers as abstractions is usually credited to the Greek philosophers Pythagoras and Archimedes .
Some Greek mathematicians treated the number 1 differently than larger numbers, sometimes even not as a number at all.
Euclid , for example, defined a unit first and then a number as a multitude of units, thus by his definition, a unit is not a number and there are no unique numbers (e.g., any two units from indefinitely many units is a 2).
However, in the definition of perfect number which comes shortly afterward, Euclid treats 1 as a number like any other.
Independent studies on numbers also occurred at around the same time in India , China, and Mesoamerica .
Modern definitions   In 19th century Europe, there was mathematical and philosophical discussion about the exact nature of the natural numbers.
Henri Poincaré stated that axioms can only be demonstrated in their finite application, and concluded that it is "the power of the mind" which allows conceiving of the indefinite repetition of the same act.
Leopold Kronecker summarized his belief as "God made the integers, all else is the work of man".
The constructivists saw a need to improve upon the logical rigor in the foundations of mathematics .
In the 1860s, Hermann Grassmann suggested a recursive definition for natural numbers, thus stating they were not really natural—but a consequence of definitions.
Later, two classes of such formal definitions were constructed; later still, they were shown to be equivalent in most practical applications.
Set-theoretical definitions of natural numbers were initiated by Frege .
He initially defined a natural number as the class of all sets that are in one-to-one correspondence with a particular set.
However, this definition turned out to lead to paradoxes, including Russell's paradox .
To avoid such paradoxes, the formalism was modified so that a natural number is defined as a particular set, and any set that can be put into one-to-one correspondence with that set is said to have that number of elements.
The second class of definitions was introduced by Charles Sanders Peirce , refined by Richard Dedekind , and further explored by Giuseppe Peano ; this approach is now called Peano arithmetic .
It is based on an axiomatization of the properties of ordinal numbers : each natural number has a successor and every non-zero natural number has a unique predecessor.
Peano arithmetic is equiconsistent with several weak systems of set theory .
One such system is ZFC with the axiom of infinity replaced by its negation.
Theorems that can be proved in ZFC but cannot be proved using the Peano Axioms include Goodstein's theorem .
With all these definitions, it is convenient to include 0 (corresponding to the empty set ) as a natural number.
Including 0 is now the common convention among set theorists  and logicians.
Other mathematicians also include 0,  and computer languages often start from zero when enumerating items like loop counters and string- or array-elements .
On the other hand, many mathematicians have kept the older tradition to take 1 to be the first natural number.
Notation   The set of all natural numbers is standardly denoted N or      N   .
{\displaystyle \mathbb {N} .}
Older texts have occasionally employed J as the symbol for this set.
Since natural numbers may contain 0 or not, it may be important to know which version is referred to.
This is often specified by the context, but may also be done by using a subscript or a superscript in the notation, such as:     Naturals without zero:     {  1  ,  2  ,  .
.
 }
=    N    ∗    =    N    +    =    N    0    ∖  {  0  }  =    N    1      {\displaystyle \{1,2,...\}=\mathbb {N} ^{*}=\mathbb {N} ^{+}=\mathbb {N} _{0}\smallsetminus \{0\}=\mathbb {N} _{1}}    Naturals with zero:      {  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  .
=    N    0    =    N    0    =    N    ∗    ∪  {  0  }    {\displaystyle \;\{0,1,2,...\}=\mathbb {N} _{0}=\mathbb {N} ^{0}=\mathbb {N} ^{*}\cup \{0\}}    Alternatively, since the natural numbers naturally form a subset of the integers (often denoted      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   ), they may be referred to as the positive, or the non-negative integers, respectively.
To be unambiguous about whether 0 is included or not, sometimes a superscript "     ∗    {\displaystyle *}   " or "+" is added in the former case, and a subscript (or superscript) "0" is added in the latter case:        {  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  …  }  =  {  x  ∈   Z   :  x  >  0  }  =    Z    +    =    Z    >  0      {\displaystyle \{1,2,3,\dots \}=\{x\in \mathbb {Z} :x>0\}=\mathbb {Z} ^{+}=\mathbb {Z} _{>0}}        {  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  …  }  =  {  x  ∈   Z   :  x  ≥  0  }  =    Z    0    +    =    Z    ≥  0      {\displaystyle \{0,1,2,\dots \}=\{x\in \mathbb {Z} :x\geq 0\}=\mathbb {Z} _{0}^{+}=\mathbb {Z} _{\geq 0}}    Properties   This section uses the convention      N   =    N    0    =    N    ∗    ∪  {  0  }    {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} =\mathbb {N} _{0}=\mathbb {N} ^{*}\cup \{0\}}   .
Addition   Given the set      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   of natural numbers and the successor function      S  :   N   →   N     {\displaystyle S\colon \mathbb {N} \to \mathbb {N} }   sending each natural number to the next one, one can define addition of natural numbers recursively by setting a + 0 = a and a + S ( b ) = S ( a + b ) for all a , b .
Thus, a + 1 = a + S(0) = S( a +0) = S( a ) , a + 2 = a + S(1) = S( a +1) = S(S( a )) , and so on.
The algebraic structure      (   N   ,  +  )    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {N} ,+)}   is a commutative  monoid with identity element 0.
It is a free monoid on one generator.
This commutative monoid satisfies the cancellation property , so it can be embedded in a group .
The smallest group containing the natural numbers is the integers .
If 1 is defined as S (0) , then b + 1 = b + S (0) = S ( b + 0) = S ( b ) .
That is, b + 1 is simply the successor of b .
Multiplication   Analogously, given that addition has been defined, a multiplication operator     ×    {\displaystyle \times }   can be defined via a × 0 = 0 and a × S( b ) = ( a × b ) + a .
This turns     (    N    ∗    ,  ×  )    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {N} ^{*},\times )}   into a free commutative monoid with identity element 1; a generator set for this monoid is the set of prime numbers .
Relationship between addition and multiplication   Addition and multiplication are compatible, which is expressed in the distribution law : a × ( b + c ) = ( a × b ) + ( a × c ) .
These properties of addition and multiplication make the natural numbers an instance of a commutative  semiring .
Semirings are an algebraic generalization of the natural numbers where multiplication is not necessarily commutative.
The lack of additive inverses, which is equivalent to the fact that      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   is not closed under subtraction (that is, subtracting one natural from another does not always result in another natural), means that      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   is not a ring ; instead it is a semiring (also known as a rig ).
If the natural numbers are taken as "excluding 0", and "starting at 1", the definitions of + and × are as above, except that they begin with a + 1 = S ( a ) and a × 1 = a .
Furthermore,     (    N   ∗     ,  +  )    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {N^{*}} ,+)}   has no identity element.
Order   In this section, juxtaposed variables such as ab indicate the product a × b ,  and the standard order of operations is assumed.
A total order on the natural numbers is defined by letting a ≤ b if and only if there exists another natural number c where a + c = b .
This order is compatible with the arithmetical operations in the following sense: if a , b and c are natural numbers and a ≤ b , then a + c ≤ b + c and ac ≤ bc .
An important property of the natural numbers is that they are well-ordered : every non-empty set of natural numbers has a least element.
The rank among well-ordered sets is expressed by an ordinal number ; for the natural numbers, this is denoted as ω (omega).
Division   In this section, juxtaposed variables such as ab indicate the product a × b , and the standard order of operations is assumed.
While it is in general not possible to divide one natural number by another and get a natural number as result, the procedure of division with remainder or Euclidean division is available as a substitute: for any two natural numbers a and b with b ≠ 0 there are natural numbers q and r such that      a  =  b  q  +  r   and   r  <  b  .
{\displaystyle a=bq+r{\text{ and }}r<b.}
The number q is called the quotient and r is called the remainder of the division of a by b .
The numbers q and r are uniquely determined by a and b .
This Euclidean division is key to the several other properties ( divisibility ), algorithms (such as the Euclidean algorithm ), and ideas in number theory.
Algebraic properties satisfied by the natural numbers   The addition (+) and multiplication (×) operations on natural numbers as defined above have several algebraic properties:  Closure under addition and multiplication: for all natural numbers a and b , both a + b and a × b are natural numbers.
Associativity : for all natural numbers a , b , and c , a + ( b + c ) = ( a + b ) + c and a × ( b × c ) = ( a × b ) × c .
Commutativity : for all natural numbers a and b , a + b = b + a and a × b = b × a .
Existence of identity elements : for every natural number a , a + 0 = a and a × 1 = a .
If the natural numbers are taken as "excluding 0", and "starting at 1", then for every natural number a , a × 1 = a .
However, the "existence of additive identity element" property is not satisfied  Distributivity of multiplication over addition for all natural numbers a , b , and c , a × ( b + c ) = ( a × b ) + ( a × c ) .
No nonzero zero divisors : if a and b are natural numbers such that a × b = 0 , then a = 0 or b = 0 (or both).
Generalizations   Two important generalizations of natural numbers arise from the two uses of counting and ordering: cardinal numbers and ordinal numbers .
A natural number can be used to express the size of a finite set; more precisely, a cardinal number is a measure for the size of a set, which is even suitable for infinite sets.
The numbering of cardinals usually begins at zero, to accommodate the empty set      ∅    {\displaystyle \emptyset }   .
This concept of "size" relies on maps between sets, such that two sets have the same size , exactly if there exists a bijection between them.
The set of natural numbers itself, and any bijective image of it, is said to be countably infinite and to have cardinality  aleph-null ( ℵ 0 ).
Natural numbers are also used as linguistic ordinal numbers : "first", "second", "third", and so forth.
The numbering of ordinals usually begins at zero, to accommodate the order type of the empty set      ∅    {\displaystyle \emptyset }   .
This way they can be assigned to the elements of a totally ordered finite set, and also to the elements of any well-ordered countably infinite set without limit points .
This assignment can be generalized to general well-orderings with a cardinality beyond countability, to yield the ordinal numbers.
An ordinal number may also be used to describe the notion of "size" for a well-ordered set, in a sense different from cardinality: if there is an order isomorphism (more than a bijection) between two well-ordered sets, they have the same ordinal number.
The first ordinal number that is not a natural number is expressed as ω ; this is also the ordinal number of the set of natural numbers itself.
The least ordinal of cardinality ℵ 0 (that is, the initial ordinal of ℵ 0 ) is ω but many well-ordered sets with cardinal number ℵ 0 have an ordinal number greater than ω .
For finite well-ordered sets, there is a one-to-one correspondence between ordinal and cardinal numbers; therefore they can both be expressed by the same natural number, the number of elements of the set.
This number can also be used to describe the position of an element in a larger finite, or an infinite, sequence .
A countable non-standard model of arithmetic satisfying the Peano Arithmetic (that is, the first-order Peano axioms) was developed by Skolem in 1933.
The hypernatural numbers are an uncountable model that can be constructed from the ordinary natural numbers via the ultrapower construction .
Other generalizations are discussed in Number § Extensions of the concept .
Georges Reeb used to claim provocatively that "The naïve integers don't fill up      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   ".
Formal definitions   There are two standard methods for formally defining natural numbers.
The first one, named for Giuseppe Peano , consists of an autonomous axiomatic theory called Peano arithmetic , based on few axioms called Peano axioms .
The second definition is based on set theory .
It defines the natural numbers as specific sets .
More precisely, each natural number n is defined as an explicitly defined set, whose elements allow counting the elements of other sets, in the sense that the sentence "a set S has n elements" means that there exists a one to one correspondence between the two sets n and S .
The sets used to define natural numbers satisfy Peano axioms.
It follows that every theorem that can be stated and proved in Peano arithmetic can also be proved in set theory.
However, the two definitions are not equivalent, as there are theorems that can be stated in terms of Peano arithmetic and proved in set theory, which are not provable inside Peano arithmetic.
A probable example is Fermat's Last Theorem .
The definition of the integers as sets satisfying Peano axioms provide a model of Peano arithmetic inside set theory.
An important consequence is that, if set theory is consistent (as it is usually guessed), then Peano arithmetic is consistent.
In other words, if a contradiction could be proved in Peano arithmetic, then set theory would be contradictory, and every theorem of set theory would be both true and wrong.
Peano axioms   Main article: Peano axioms  The five Peano axioms are the following:     0 is a natural number.
Every natural number has a successor which is also a natural number.
0 is not the successor of any natural number.
If the successor of     x    {\displaystyle x}   equals the successor of     y    {\displaystyle y}   , then     x    {\displaystyle x}   equals     y    {\displaystyle y}   .
The axiom of induction : If a statement is true of 0, and if the truth of that statement for a number implies its truth for the successor of that number, then the statement is true for every natural number.
These are not the original axioms published by Peano, but are named in his honor.
Some forms of the Peano axioms have 1 in place of 0.
In ordinary arithmetic, the successor of     x    {\displaystyle x}   is     x  +  1    {\displaystyle x+1}   .
Set-theoretic definition   Main article: Set-theoretic definition of natural numbers  Intuitively, the natural number n is the common property of all sets that have n elements.
So, it seems natural to define n as an equivalence class under the relation "can be made in one to one correspondence ".
This does not work in set theory , as such an equivalence class would not be a set (because of Russell's paradox ).
The standard solution is to define a particular set with n elements that will be called the natural number n .
The following definition was first published by John von Neumann ,  although Levy attributes the idea to unpublished work of Zermelo in 1916.
As this definition extends to infinite set as a definition of ordinal number , the sets considered below are sometimes called von Neumann ordinals .
The definition proceeds as follows:  Call 0 = { } , the empty set .
Define the successor  S ( a ) of any set a by S ( a ) = a ∪ { a } .
By the axiom of infinity , there exist sets which contain 0 and are closed under the successor function.
Such sets are said to be inductive .
The intersection of all inductive sets is still an inductive set.
This intersection is the set of the natural numbers .
It follows that the natural numbers are defined iteratively as follows:  0 = { } ,  1 = 0 ∪ {0} = {0} = {{ }} ,  2 = 1 ∪ {1} = {0, 1} = {{ }, {{ }}} ,  3 = 2 ∪ {2} = {0, 1, 2} = {{ }, {{ }}, {{ }, {{ }}}} ,  n = n −1 ∪ { n −1} = {0, 1, ..., n −1} = {{ }, {{ }}, ..., {{ }, {{ }}, ...}} ,  etc.
It can be checked that the natural numbers satisfy the Peano axioms .
With this definition, given a natural number n , the sentence "a set S has n elements" can be formally defined as "there exists a bijection from n to S .
This formalizes the operation of counting the elements of S .
Also, n ≤ m if and only if n is a subset of m .
In other words, the set inclusion defines the usual total order on the natural numbers.
This order is a well-order .
It follows from the definition that each natural number is equal to the set of all natural numbers less than it.
This definition, can be extended to the von Neumann definition of ordinals for defining all ordinal numbers , including the infinite ones: "each ordinal is the well-ordered set of all smaller ordinals."
If one does not accept the axiom of infinity , the natural numbers may not form a set.
Nevertheless, the natural numbers can still be individually defined as above, and they still satisfy the Peano axioms.
There are other set theoretical constructions.
In particular, Ernst Zermelo provided a construction that is nowadays only of historical interest, and is sometimes referred to as Zermelo ordinals .
It consists in defining 0 as the empty set, and S ( a ) = { a } .
With this definition each natural number is a singleton set .
So, the property of the natural numbers to represent cardinalities is not directly accessible; only the ordinal property (being the n th element of a sequence) is immediate.
Unlike von Neumann's construction, the Zermelo ordinals do not extend to infinite ordinals.
===Proof by contraposition===
{{Main|Contraposition}}
] ] the statement "if ''p'' then ''q''" by establishing the ] ]: "if ''not q'' then ''not p''".
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Mathematical logic concept  For contraposition in the field of traditional logic, see Contraposition (traditional logic) .
For contraposition in the field of symbolic logic, see Transposition (logic) .
In logic and mathematics , contraposition refers to the inference of going from a conditional statement into its logically equivalent  contrapositive , and an associated proof method known as proof by contraposition .
The contrapositive of a statement has its antecedent and consequent  inverted and flipped .
Conditional statement      P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   .
In formulas : the contrapositive of     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   is     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg Q\rightarrow \neg P}   .
If P , Then Q .
— If not Q , Then not P .
 "
If it is raining, then I wear my coat"  — "If I don't wear my coat, then it isn't raining."
The law of contraposition says that a conditional statement is true if, and only if, its contrapositive is true.
The contrapositive (     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg Q\rightarrow \neg P}   ) can be compared with three other statements:  Inversion (the inverse ),     ¬  P  →  ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \neg P\rightarrow \neg Q}    "If it is not raining, then I don't wear my coat ."
Unlike the contrapositive, the inverse's truth value is not at all dependent on whether or not the original proposition was true, as evidenced here.
Conversion (the converse ),     Q  →  P    {\displaystyle Q\rightarrow P}    "If I wear my coat, then it is raining ."
The converse is actually the contrapositive of the inverse, and so always has the same truth value as the inverse (which as stated earlier does not always share the same truth value as that of the original proposition).
Negation (the logical complement ),     ¬  (  P  →  Q  )    {\displaystyle \neg (P\rightarrow Q)}    " It is not the case that if it is raining then I wear my coat.
", or equivalently, " Sometimes, when it is raining, I don't wear my coat .
"
If the negation is true, then the original proposition (and by extension the contrapositive) is false.
Note that if     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\rightarrow Q}   is true and one is given that     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   is false (i.e.,     ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \neg Q}   ), then it can logically be concluded that     P    {\displaystyle P}   must be also false (i.e.,     ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg P}   ).
This is often called the law of contrapositive , or the modus tollens  rule of inference .
Intuitive explanation    In the Euler diagram shown, if something is in A, it must be in B as well.
So we can interpret "all of A is in B" as:     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}    It is also clear that anything that is not within B (the blue region) cannot be within A, either.
This statement, which can be expressed as:     ¬  B  →  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg B\to \neg A}    is the contrapositive of the above statement.
Therefore, one can say that     (  A  →  B  )  ↔  (  ¬  B  →  ¬  A  )  .
{\displaystyle (A\to B)\leftrightarrow (\neg B\to \neg A).}
In practice, this equivalence can be used to make proving a statement easier.
For example, if one wishes to prove that every girl in the United States (A) has brown hair (B), one can either try to directly prove     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}   by checking that all girls in the United States do indeed have brown hair, or try to prove     ¬  B  →  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg B\to \neg A}   by checking that all girls without brown hair are indeed all outside the US.
In particular, if one were to find at least one girl without brown hair within the US, then one would have disproved     ¬  B  →  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg B\to \neg A}   , and equivalently     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}   .
In general, for any statement where A implies B , not B always implies not A .
As a result, proving or disproving either one of these statements automatically proves or disproves the other, as they are logically equivalent to each other.
Formal definition   A proposition Q is implicated by a proposition P when the following relationship holds:     (  P  →  Q  )    {\displaystyle (P\to Q)}    This states that, "if     P    {\displaystyle P}   , then     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   ", or, "if Socrates is a man , then Socrates is human ."
In a conditional such as this,     P    {\displaystyle P}   is the antecedent , and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   is the consequent .
One statement is the contrapositive of the other only when its antecedent is the negated consequent of the other, and vice versa.
Thus a contrapositive generally takes the form of:     (  ¬  Q  →  ¬  P  )  .
{\displaystyle (\neg Q\to \neg P).}
That is, "If not-     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   , then not-     P    {\displaystyle P}   ", or, more clearly, "If     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   is not the case, then P is not the case."
Using our example, this is rendered as "If Socrates is not human , then Socrates is not a man ."
This statement is said to be contraposed to the original and is logically equivalent to it.
Due to their logical equivalence , stating one effectively states the other; when one is true , the other is also true, and when one is false, the other is also false.
Strictly speaking, a contraposition can only exist in two simple conditionals.
However, a contraposition may also exist in two complex, universal conditionals, if they are similar.
Thus,     ∀   x   (  P   x   →  Q   x   )    {\displaystyle \forall {x}(P{x}\to Q{x})}   , or "All     P    {\displaystyle P}   s are     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   s," is contraposed to     ∀   x   (  ¬  Q   x   →  ¬  P   x   )    {\displaystyle \forall {x}(\neg Q{x}\to \neg P{x})}   , or "All non-     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   s are non-     P    {\displaystyle P}   s."    Simple proof by definition of a conditional   In first-order logic , the conditional is defined as:     A  →  B   ↔   ¬  A  ∨  B    {\displaystyle A\to B\,\leftrightarrow \,\neg A\lor B}    which can be made equivalent to its contrapositive, as follows:         ¬  A  ∨  B       ↔  B  ∨  ¬  A           ↔  ¬  B  →  ¬  A        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\neg A\lor B\,&\,\leftrightarrow B\lor \neg A\\\,&\,\leftrightarrow \neg B\to \neg A\end{aligned}}}     Simple proof by contradiction   Let:     (  A  →  B  )  ∧  ¬  B    {\displaystyle (A\to B)\land \neg B}    It is given that, if A is true, then B is true, and it is also given that B is not true.
We can then show that A must not be true by contradiction.
For if A were true, then B would have to also be true (by Modus Ponens ).
However, it is given that B is not true, so we have a contradiction.
Therefore, A is not true (assuming that we are dealing with bivalent statements that are either true or false):     (  A  →  B  )  →  (  ¬  B  →  ¬  A  )    {\displaystyle (A\to B)\to (\neg B\to \neg A)}    We can apply the same process the other way round, starting with the assumptions that:     (  ¬  B  →  ¬  A  )  ∧  A    {\displaystyle (\neg B\to \neg A)\land A}    Here, we also know that B is either true or not true.
If B is not true, then A is also not true.
However, it is given that A is true, so the assumption that B is not true leads to a contradiction, which means that it is not the case that B is not true.
Therefore, B must be true:     (  ¬  B  →  ¬  A  )  →  (  A  →  B  )    {\displaystyle (\neg B\to \neg A)\to (A\to B)}    Combining the two proved statements together, we obtain the sought-after logical equivalence between a conditional and its contrapositive:     (  A  →  B  )  ≡  (  ¬  B  →  ¬  A  )    {\displaystyle (A\to B)\equiv (\neg B\to \neg A)}     More rigorous proof of the equivalence of contrapositives   Logical equivalence between two propositions means that they are true together or false together.
To prove that contrapositives are logically equivalent , we need to understand when material implication is true or false.
P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}    This is only false when     P    {\displaystyle P}   is true and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   is false.
Therefore, we can reduce this proposition to the statement "False when     P    {\displaystyle P}   and not-     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   " (i.e.
"True when it is not the case that     P    {\displaystyle P}   and not-     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   "):     ¬  (  P  ∧  ¬  Q  )    {\displaystyle \neg (P\land \neg Q)}    The elements of a conjunction can be reversed with no effect (by commutativity ):     ¬  (  ¬  Q  ∧  P  )    {\displaystyle \neg (\neg Q\land P)}    We define     R    {\displaystyle R}   as equal to "     ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \neg Q}   ", and     S    {\displaystyle S}   as equal to     ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg P}   (from this,     ¬  S    {\displaystyle \neg S}   is equal to     ¬  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg \neg P}   , which is equal to just     P    {\displaystyle P}   ):     ¬  (  R  ∧  ¬  S  )    {\displaystyle \neg (R\land \neg S)}    This reads "It is not the case that ( R is true and S is false)", which is the definition of a material conditional.
We can then make this substitution:     R  →  S    {\displaystyle R\to S}    By reverting R and S back into     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   , we then obtain the desired contrapositive:     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg Q\to \neg P}     Comparisons    name  form  description   implication  if P then Q  first statement implies truth of second   inverse  if not P then not Q  negation of both statements   converse  if Q then P  reversal of both statements   contrapositive  if not Q then not P  reversal and negation of both statements   negation  P and not Q  contradicts the implication  Examples   Take the statement " All red objects have color.
"
This can be equivalently expressed as " If an object is red, then it has color.
"
The contrapositive is " If an object does not have color, then it is not red.
"
This follows logically from our initial statement and, like it, it is evidently true.
The inverse is " If an object is not red, then it does not have color.
"
An object which is blue is not red, and still has color.
Therefore, in this case the inverse is false.
The converse is " If an object has color, then it is red.
"
Objects can have other colors, so the converse of our statement is false.
The negation is " There exists a red object that does not have color.
"
This statement is false because the initial statement which it negates is true.
In other words, the contrapositive is logically equivalent to a given conditional statement, though not sufficient for a biconditional .
Similarly, take the statement " All quadrilaterals have four sides, " or equivalently expressed " If a polygon is a quadrilateral, then it has four sides.
"
The contrapositive is " If a polygon does not have four sides, then it is not a quadrilateral.
"
This follows logically, and as a rule, contrapositives share the truth value of their conditional.
The inverse is " If a polygon is not a quadrilateral, then it does not have four sides.
"
In this case, unlike the last example, the inverse of the statement is true.
The converse is " If a polygon has four sides, then it is a quadrilateral.
"
Again, in this case, unlike the last example, the converse of the statement is true.
The negation is " There is at least one quadrilateral that does not have four sides.
"
This statement is clearly false.
Since the statement and the converse are both true, it is called a biconditional , and can be expressed as " A polygon is a quadrilateral if, and only if, it has four sides.
"
(The phrase if and only if is sometimes abbreviated as iff .)
That is, having four sides is both necessary to be a quadrilateral, and alone sufficient to deem it a quadrilateral.
Truth   If a statement is true, then its contrapositive is true (and vice versa).
If a statement is false, then its contrapositive is false (and vice versa).
If a statement's inverse is true, then its converse is true (and vice versa).
If a statement's inverse is false, then its converse is false (and vice versa).
If a statement's negation is false, then the statement is true (and vice versa).
If a statement (or its contrapositive) and the inverse (or the converse) are both true or both false, then it is known as a logical biconditional .
Application   Because the contrapositive of a statement always has the same truth value (truth or falsity) as the statement itself, it can be a powerful tool for proving mathematical theorems (especially if the truth of the contrapositive is easier to establish than the truth of the statement itself).
A proof by contraposition (contrapositive) is a direct proof of the contrapositive of a statement.
However, indirect methods such as proof by contradiction can also be used with contraposition, as, for example, in the proof of the irrationality of the square root of 2 .
By the definition of a rational number , the statement can be made that " If       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is rational, then it can be expressed as an irreducible fraction ".
This statement is true because it is a restatement of a definition.
The contrapositive of this statement is " If       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   cannot be expressed as an irreducible fraction, then it is not rational ".
This contrapositive, like the original statement, is also true.
Therefore, if it can be proven that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   cannot be expressed as an irreducible fraction, then it must be the case that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   is not a rational number.
The latter can be proved by contradiction.
The previous example employed the contrapositive of a definition to prove a theorem.
One can also prove a theorem by proving the contrapositive of the theorem's statement.
To prove that if a positive integer N is a non-square number , its square root is irrational , we can equivalently prove its contrapositive, that if a positive integer N has a square root that is rational, then N is a square number.
This can be shown by setting √ N equal to the rational expression a/b with a and b being positive integers with no common prime factor, and squaring to obtain N = a 2 / b 2 and noting that since N is a positive integer b =1 so that N = a 2 , a square number.
Correspondence to other mathematical frameworks   Intuitionistic logic   In intuitionistic logic , the statement     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   cannot be proven to be equivalent to     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot Q\to \lnot P}   .
We can prove that     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   implies     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot Q\to \lnot P}   , but the reverse implication, from     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot Q\to \lnot P}   to     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   , requires the law of the excluded middle or an equivalent axiom.
Probability calculus   Contraposition represents an instance of Bayes' theorem which in a specific form can be expressed as:     Pr  (  ¬  P  ∣  ¬  Q  )  =     Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  ¬  P  )   a  (  ¬  P  )    Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  ¬  P  )   a  (  ¬  P  )  +  Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  P  )   a  (  P  )     .
{\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot P\mid \lnot Q)={\frac {\Pr(\lnot Q\mid \lnot P)\,a(\lnot P)}{\Pr(\lnot Q\mid \lnot P)\,a(\lnot P)+\Pr(\lnot Q\mid P)\,a(P)}}.}
In the equation above the conditional probability      Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  P  )    {\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot Q\mid P)}   generalizes the logical statement     P  →  ¬  Q    {\displaystyle P\to \lnot Q}   , i.e.
in addition to assigning TRUE or FALSE we can also assign any probability to the statement.
The term     a  (  P  )    {\displaystyle a(P)}   denotes the base rate (aka.
the prior probability ) of     P    {\displaystyle P}   .
Assume that     Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  P  )  =  1    {\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot Q\mid P)=1}   is equivalent to     P  →  ¬  Q    {\displaystyle P\to \lnot Q}   being TRUE, and that     Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  P  )  =  0    {\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot Q\mid P)=0}   is equivalent to     P  →  ¬  Q    {\displaystyle P\to \lnot Q}   being FALSE.
It is then easy to see that     Pr  (  ¬  P  ∣  ¬  Q  )  =  1    {\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot P\mid \lnot Q)=1}   when     Pr  (  Q  ∣  P  )  =  1    {\displaystyle \Pr(Q\mid P)=1}   i.e.
when     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   is TRUE.
This is because     Pr  (  ¬  Q  ∣  P  )  =  1  −  Pr  (  Q  ∣  P  )  =  0    {\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot Q\mid P)=1-\Pr(Q\mid P)=0}   so that the fraction on the right-hand side of the equation above is equal to 1, and hence     Pr  (  ¬  P  ∣  ¬  Q  )  =  1    {\displaystyle \Pr(\lnot P\mid \lnot Q)=1}   which is equivalent to     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot Q\to \lnot P}   being TRUE.
Hence, Bayes' theorem represents a generalization of contraposition .
Subjective logic   Contraposition represents an instance of the subjective Bayes' theorem in subjective logic expressed as:     (   ω   P      |   ~     Q    A    ,   ω   P      |   ~     ¬  Q    A    )  =  (   ω   Q   |   P    A    ,   ω   Q   |   ¬  P    A    )       ϕ    ~       a   P     ,    {\displaystyle (\omega _{P{\tilde {|}}Q}^{A},\omega _{P{\tilde {|}}\lnot Q}^{A})=(\omega _{Q|P}^{A},\omega _{Q|\lnot P}^{A})\,{\widetilde {\phi \,}}\,a_{P}\,,}   where     (   ω   Q   |   P    A    ,   ω   Q   |   ¬  P    A    )    {\displaystyle (\omega _{Q|P}^{A},\omega _{Q|\lnot P}^{A})}   denotes a pair of binomial conditional opinions given by source     A    {\displaystyle A}   .
The parameter      a   P      {\displaystyle a_{P}}   denotes the base rate (aka.
The pair of derivative inverted conditional opinions is denoted     (   ω   P      |   ~     Q    A    ,   ω   P      |   ~     ¬  Q    A    )    {\displaystyle (\omega _{P{\tilde {|}}Q}^{A},\omega _{P{\tilde {|}}\lnot Q}^{A})}   .
The conditional opinion      ω   Q   |   P    A      {\displaystyle \omega _{Q|P}^{A}}   generalizes the logical statement     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   , i.e.
in addition to assigning TRUE or FALSE the source     A    {\displaystyle A}   can assign any subjective opinion to the statement.
The case where      ω   Q  ∣  P    A      {\displaystyle \omega _{Q\mid P}^{A}}   is an absolute TRUE opinion is equivalent to source     A    {\displaystyle A}   saying that     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   is TRUE, and the case where      ω   Q  ∣  P    A      {\displaystyle \omega _{Q\mid P}^{A}}   is an absolute FALSE opinion is equivalent to source     A    {\displaystyle A}   saying that     P  →  Q    {\displaystyle P\to Q}   is FALSE.
In the case when the conditional opinion      ω   Q   |   P    A      {\displaystyle \omega _{Q|P}^{A}}   is absolute TRUE the subjective Bayes' theorem operator         ϕ    ~       {\displaystyle {\widetilde {\phi \,}}}   of subjective logic produces an absolute FALSE derivative conditional opinion      ω   P      |   ~     ¬  Q    A      {\displaystyle \omega _{P{\widetilde {|}}\lnot Q}^{A}}   and thereby an absolute TRUE derivative conditional opinion      ω   ¬  P      |   ~     ¬  Q    A      {\displaystyle \omega _{\lnot P{\widetilde {|}}\lnot Q}^{A}}   which is equivalent to     ¬  Q  →  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot Q\to \lnot P}   being TRUE.
Hence, the subjective Bayes' theorem represents a generalization of both contraposition and Bayes' theorem .
Logical argument  In logic , the contrapositive of a conditional statement is formed by negating both terms and reversing the direction of inference.
More specifically, the contrapositive of the statement "if A , then B " is "if not B , then not A ."
A statement and its contrapositive are logically equivalent, in the sense that if the statement is true, then its contrapositive is true and vice versa.
In mathematics , proof by contrapositive , or proof by contraposition, is a rule of inference used in proofs , where one infers a conditional statement from its contrapositive.
In other words, the conclusion "if A , then B " is inferred by constructing a proof of the claim "if not B , then not A " instead.
More often than not, this approach is preferred if the contrapositive is easier to prove than the original conditional statement itself.
Logically, the validity of proof by contrapositive can be demonstrated by the use of the following truth table , where it is shown that p → q and     ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   q →     ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   p share the same truth values in all scenarios:   p   q       ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   p       ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   q   p → q       ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   q →     ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   p    T  T  F  F  T  T   T  F  F  T  F  F   F  T  T  F  T  T   F  F  T  T  T  T   Difference with proof by contradiction   Proof by contradiction : Assume (for contradiction) that     ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg A}   is true.
Use this assumption to prove a contradiction .
It follows that     ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg A}   is false, so     A    {\displaystyle A}   is true.
Proof by contrapositive : To prove     A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}   , prove its contrapositive statement, which is     ¬  B  →  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg B\to \neg A}   .
Example   Let     x    {\displaystyle x}   be an integer.
To prove: If      x   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}}    is even, then     x    {\displaystyle x}   is even.
Although a direct proof can be given, we choose to prove this statement by contraposition.
The contrapositive of the above statement is:  If     x    {\displaystyle x}   is not even, then      x   2      {\displaystyle x^{2}}    is not even.
This latter statement can be proven as follows: suppose that x is not even, then x is odd.
Having proved the contrapositive, we can then infer that the original statement is true.
Systematic logical process capable of deriving a conclusion from hypotheses  Transformation rules  Propositional calculus  Rules of inference  Implication introduction / elimination ( modus ponens )  Biconditional introduction / elimination  Conjunction introduction / elimination  Disjunction introduction / elimination  Disjunctive / hypothetical syllogism  Constructive / destructive dilemma  Absorption / modus tollens / modus ponendo tollens  Negation introduction   Rules of replacement   Associativity  Commutativity  Distributivity  Double negation  De Morgan's laws  Transposition  Material implication  Exportation  Tautology    Predicate logic  Rules of inference  Universal generalization / instantiation  Existential generalization / instantiation   In philosophy of logic and logic , a rule of inference , inference rule or transformation rule is a logical form consisting of a function which takes premises, analyzes their syntax , and returns a conclusion (or conclusions ).
For example, the rule of inference called modus ponens takes two premises, one in the form "If p then q" and another in the form "p", and returns the conclusion "q".
The rule is valid with respect to the semantics of classical logic (as well as the semantics of many other non-classical logics ), in the sense that if the premises are true (under an interpretation), then so is the conclusion.
Typically, a rule of inference preserves truth, a semantic property.
In many-valued logic , it preserves a general designation.
But a rule of inference's action is purely syntactic, and does not need to preserve any semantic property: any function from sets of formulae to formulae counts as a rule of inference.
Usually only rules that are recursive are important; i.e.
rules such that there is an effective procedure for determining whether any given formula is the conclusion of a given set of formulae according to the rule.
An example of a rule that is not effective in this sense is the infinitary ω-rule .
Popular rules of inference in propositional logic include modus ponens , modus tollens , and contraposition .
First-order predicate logic uses rules of inference to deal with logical quantifiers .
Standard form   In formal logic (and many related areas), rules of inference are usually given in the following standard form: Premise#1 Premise#2  ...
 Premise#n  Conclusion This expression states that whenever in the course of some logical derivation the given premises have been obtained, the specified conclusion can be taken for granted as well.
The exact formal language that is used to describe both premises and conclusions depends on the actual context of the derivations.
In a simple case, one may use logical formulae, such as in:      A  →  B    {\displaystyle A\to B}           A      _        {\displaystyle {\underline {A\quad \quad \quad }}\,\!}
B     {\displaystyle B\!}
This is the modus ponens rule of propositional logic .
Rules of inference are often formulated as schemata employing metavariables .
In the rule (schema) above, the metavariables A and B can be instantiated to any element of the universe (or sometimes, by convention, a restricted subset such as propositions ) to form an infinite set of inference rules.
A proof system is formed from a set of rules chained together to form proofs, also called derivations .
Any derivation has only one final conclusion, which is the statement proved or derived.
If premises are left unsatisfied in the derivation, then the derivation is a proof of a hypothetical statement: " if the premises hold, then the conclusion holds."
Example: Hilbert systems for two propositional logics   In a Hilbert system , the premises and conclusion of the inference rules are simply formulae of some language, usually employing metavariables.
For graphical compactness of the presentation and to emphasize the distinction between axioms and rules of inference, this section uses the sequent notation (     ⊢    {\displaystyle \vdash }   ) instead of a vertical presentation of rules.
In this notation,          Premise   1       Premise   2       Conclusion         {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}{\text{Premise }}1\\{\text{Premise }}2\\\hline {\text{Conclusion}}\end{array}}}    is written as     (   Premise   1  )  ,  (   Premise   2  )  ⊢  (   Conclusion   )    {\displaystyle ({\text{Premise }}1),({\text{Premise }}2)\vdash ({\text{Conclusion}})}   .
The formal language for classical propositional logic can be expressed using just negation (¬), implication (→) and propositional symbols.
A well-known axiomatization, comprising three axiom schemata and one inference rule ( modus ponens ), is:  (CA1) ⊢ A → ( B → A ) (CA2) ⊢ ( A → ( B → C )) → (( A → B ) → ( A → C )) (CA3) ⊢ (¬ A → ¬ B ) → ( B → A ) (MP) A , A → B ⊢ B   It may seem redundant to have two notions of inference in this case, ⊢ and →.
In classical propositional logic, they indeed coincide; the deduction theorem states that A ⊢ B if and only if ⊢ A → B .
There is however a distinction worth emphasizing even in this case: the first notation describes a deduction , that is an activity of passing from sentences to sentences, whereas A → B is simply a formula made with a logical connective , implication in this case.
Without an inference rule (like modus ponens in this case), there is no deduction or inference.
This point is illustrated in Lewis Carroll 's dialogue called " What the Tortoise Said to Achilles ",  as well as later attempts by Bertrand Russell and Peter Winch to resolve the paradox introduced in the dialogue.
For some non-classical logics, the deduction theorem does not hold.
For example, the three-valued logic of Łukasiewicz can be axiomatized as:    (CA1) ⊢ A → ( B → A ) (LA2) ⊢ ( A → B ) → (( B → C ) → ( A → C )) (CA3) ⊢ (¬ A → ¬ B ) → ( B → A ) (LA4) ⊢ (( A → ¬ A ) → A ) → A (MP) A , A → B ⊢ B   This sequence differs from classical logic by the change in axiom 2 and the addition of axiom 4.
The classical deduction theorem does not hold for this logic, however a modified form does hold, namely A ⊢ B if and only if ⊢ A → ( A → B ).
Admissibility and derivability   Main article: Admissible rule  In a set of rules, an inference rule could be redundant in the sense that it is admissible or derivable .
A derivable rule is one whose conclusion can be derived from its premises using the other rules.
An admissible rule is one whose conclusion holds whenever the premises hold.
All derivable rules are admissible.
To appreciate the difference, consider the following set of rules for defining the natural numbers (the judgment      n      n  a  t      {\displaystyle n\,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}   asserts the fact that     n    {\displaystyle n}   is a natural number):                   0       n  a  t                n      n  a  t           s  (   n   )       n  a  t               {\displaystyle {\begin{matrix}{\begin{array}{c}\\\hline {\mathbf {0} \,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\end{array}}&{\begin{array}{c}{n\,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\\\hline {\mathbf {s(} n\mathbf {)} \,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\end{array}}\end{matrix}}}    The first rule states that 0 is a natural number, and the second states that s( n ) is a natural number if n is.
In this proof system, the following rule, demonstrating that the second successor of a natural number is also a natural number, is derivable:           n      n  a  t           s  (  s  (   n   )  )       n  a  t           {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}{n\,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\\\hline {\mathbf {s(s(} n\mathbf {))} \,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\end{array}}}    Its derivation is the composition of two uses of the successor rule above.
The following rule for asserting the existence of a predecessor for any nonzero number is merely admissible:            s  (   n   )       n  a  t          n      n  a  t           {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}{\mathbf {s(} n\mathbf {)} \,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\\\hline {n\,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\end{array}}}    This is a true fact of natural numbers, as can be proven by induction .
(To prove that this rule is admissible, assume a derivation of the premise and induct on it to produce a derivation of     n      n  a  t      {\displaystyle n\,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}   .)
However, it is not derivable, because it depends on the structure of the derivation of the premise.
Because of this, derivability is stable under additions to the proof system, whereas admissibility is not.
To see the difference, suppose the following nonsense rule were added to the proof system:               s  (  −  3  )       n  a  t           {\displaystyle {\begin{array}{c}\\\hline {\mathbf {s(-3)} \,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}\end{array}}}    In this new system, the double-successor rule is still derivable.
However, the rule for finding the predecessor is no longer admissible, because there is no way to derive      −  3       n  a  t      {\displaystyle \mathbf {-3} \,\,{\mathsf {nat}}}   .
The brittleness of admissibility comes from the way it is proved: since the proof can induct on the structure of the derivations of the premises, extensions to the system add new cases to this proof, which may no longer hold.
Admissible rules can be thought of as theorems of a proof system.
For instance, in a sequent calculus where cut elimination holds, the cut rule is admissible.
Concept in logic  In logic and mathematics , statements     p    {\displaystyle p}   and     q    {\displaystyle q}   are said to be logically equivalent if they have the same truth value in every model .
The logical equivalence of     p    {\displaystyle p}   and     q    {\displaystyle q}   is sometimes expressed as     p  ≡  q    {\displaystyle p\equiv q}   ,     p  ::  q    {\displaystyle p::q}   ,       E    p  q    {\displaystyle {\textsf {E}}pq}   , or     p   ⟺   q    {\displaystyle p\iff q}   , depending on the notation being used.
However, these symbols are also used for material equivalence , so proper interpretation would depend on the context.
Logical equivalence is different from material equivalence, although the two concepts are intrinsically related.
Logical equivalences   In logic, many common logical equivalences exist and are often listed as laws or properties.
The following tables illustrate some of these.
General logical equivalences    Equivalence  Name        p  ∧  ⊤  ≡  p    {\displaystyle p\wedge \top \equiv p}       p  ∨  ⊥  ≡  p    {\displaystyle p\vee \bot \equiv p}    Identity laws       p  ∨  ⊤  ≡  ⊤    {\displaystyle p\vee \top \equiv \top }       p  ∧  ⊥  ≡  ⊥    {\displaystyle p\wedge \bot \equiv \bot }    Domination laws       p  ∨  p  ≡  p    {\displaystyle p\vee p\equiv p}       p  ∧  p  ≡  p    {\displaystyle p\wedge p\equiv p}    Idempotent or tautology laws       ¬  (  ¬  p  )  ≡  p    {\displaystyle \neg (\neg p)\equiv p}    Double negation law       p  ∨  q  ≡  q  ∨  p    {\displaystyle p\vee q\equiv q\vee p}       p  ∧  q  ≡  q  ∧  p    {\displaystyle p\wedge q\equiv q\wedge p}    Commutative laws        (  p  ∨  q  )  ∨  r  ≡  p  ∨  (  q  ∨  r  )    {\displaystyle (p\vee q)\vee r\equiv p\vee (q\vee r)}       (  p  ∧  q  )  ∧  r  ≡  p  ∧  (  q  ∧  r  )    {\displaystyle (p\wedge q)\wedge r\equiv p\wedge (q\wedge r)}    Associative laws        p  ∨  (  q  ∧  r  )  ≡  (  p  ∨  q  )  ∧  (  p  ∨  r  )    {\displaystyle p\vee (q\wedge r)\equiv (p\vee q)\wedge (p\vee r)}       p  ∧  (  q  ∨  r  )  ≡  (  p  ∧  q  )  ∨  (  p  ∧  r  )    {\displaystyle p\wedge (q\vee r)\equiv (p\wedge q)\vee (p\wedge r)}    Distributive laws        ¬  (  p  ∧  q  )  ≡  ¬  p  ∨  ¬  q    {\displaystyle \neg (p\wedge q)\equiv \neg p\vee \neg q}       ¬  (  p  ∨  q  )  ≡  ¬  p  ∧  ¬  q    {\displaystyle \neg (p\vee q)\equiv \neg p\wedge \neg q}    De Morgan's laws        p  ∨  (  p  ∧  q  )  ≡  p    {\displaystyle p\vee (p\wedge q)\equiv p}       p  ∧  (  p  ∨  q  )  ≡  p    {\displaystyle p\wedge (p\vee q)\equiv p}    Absorption laws        p  ∨  ¬  p  ≡  ⊤    {\displaystyle p\vee \neg p\equiv \top }       p  ∧  ¬  p  ≡  ⊥    {\displaystyle p\wedge \neg p\equiv \bot }    Negation laws  Logical equivalences involving conditional statements       p   ⟹   q  ≡  ¬  p  ∨  q    {\displaystyle p\implies q\equiv \neg p\vee q}        p   ⟹   q  ≡  ¬  q   ⟹   ¬  p    {\displaystyle p\implies q\equiv \neg q\implies \neg p}        p  ∨  q  ≡  ¬  p   ⟹   q    {\displaystyle p\vee q\equiv \neg p\implies q}        p  ∧  q  ≡  ¬  (  p   ⟹   ¬  q  )    {\displaystyle p\wedge q\equiv \neg (p\implies \neg q)}        ¬  (  p   ⟹   q  )  ≡  p  ∧  ¬  q    {\displaystyle \neg (p\implies q)\equiv p\wedge \neg q}        (  p   ⟹   q  )  ∧  (  p   ⟹   r  )  ≡  p   ⟹   (  q  ∧  r  )    {\displaystyle (p\implies q)\wedge (p\implies r)\equiv p\implies (q\wedge r)}        (  p   ⟹   q  )  ∨  (  p   ⟹   r  )  ≡  p   ⟹   (  q  ∨  r  )    {\displaystyle (p\implies q)\vee (p\implies r)\equiv p\implies (q\vee r)}        (  p   ⟹   r  )  ∧  (  q   ⟹   r  )  ≡  (  p  ∨  q  )   ⟹   r    {\displaystyle (p\implies r)\wedge (q\implies r)\equiv (p\vee q)\implies r}        (  p   ⟹   r  )  ∨  (  q   ⟹   r  )  ≡  (  p  ∧  q  )   ⟹   r    {\displaystyle (p\implies r)\vee (q\implies r)\equiv (p\wedge q)\implies r}    Logical equivalences involving biconditionals       p   ⟺   q  ≡  (  p   ⟹   q  )  ∧  (  q   ⟹   p  )    {\displaystyle p\iff q\equiv (p\implies q)\wedge (q\implies p)}        p   ⟺   q  ≡  ¬  p   ⟺   ¬  q    {\displaystyle p\iff q\equiv \neg p\iff \neg q}        p   ⟺   q  ≡  (  p  ∧  q  )  ∨  (  ¬  p  ∧  ¬  q  )    {\displaystyle p\iff q\equiv (p\wedge q)\vee (\neg p\wedge \neg q)}        ¬  (  p   ⟺   q  )  ≡  p   ⟺   ¬  q  ≡  p  ⊕  q    {\displaystyle \neg (p\iff q)\equiv p\iff \neg q\equiv p\oplus q}    Where     ⊕    {\displaystyle \oplus }   represents XOR .
Examples   In logic   The following statements are logically equivalent:  If Lisa is in Denmark , then she is in Europe (a statement of the form     d   ⟹   e    {\displaystyle d\implies e}   ).
If Lisa is not in Europe, then she is not in Denmark (a statement of the form     ¬  e   ⟹   ¬  d    {\displaystyle \neg e\implies \neg d}   ).
Syntactically, (1) and (2) are derivable from each other via the rules of contraposition and double negation .
Semantically, (1) and (2) are true in exactly the same models (interpretations, valuations); namely, those in which either Lisa is in Denmark is false or Lisa is in Europe is true.
(Note that in this example, classical logic is assumed.
Some non-classical logics do not deem (1) and (2) to be logically equivalent.)
Relation to material equivalence   Logical equivalence is different from material equivalence.
Formulas     p    {\displaystyle p}   and     q    {\displaystyle q}   are logically equivalent if and only if the statement of their material equivalence (     p  ↔  q    {\displaystyle p\leftrightarrow q}   )  is a tautology.
The material equivalence of     p    {\displaystyle p}   and     q    {\displaystyle q}   (often written as     p  ↔  q    {\displaystyle p\leftrightarrow q}   ) is itself another statement in the same object language as     p    {\displaystyle p}   and     q    {\displaystyle q}   .
This statement expresses the idea "'     p    {\displaystyle p}   if and only if     q    {\displaystyle q}   '".
In particular, the truth value of     p  ↔  q    {\displaystyle p\leftrightarrow q}   can change from one model to another.
On the other hand, the claim that two formulas are logically equivalent is a statement in metalanguage , which expresses a relationship between two statements     p    {\displaystyle p}   and     q    {\displaystyle q}   .
The statements are logically equivalent if, in every model, they have the same truth value.
Mathematical logic concept  For contraposition in the field of traditional logic, see Contraposition (traditional logic) .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Proof by showing that the negation is impossible   In logic , proof by contradiction is a form of proof that establishes the truth or the validity of a proposition , by showing that assuming the proposition to be false leads to a contradiction .
Although it is quite freely used in mathematical proofs, not every school of mathematical thought accepts this kind of nonconstructive proof as universally valid.
More broadly, proof by contradiction is any form of argument that establishes a statement by arriving at a contradiction, even when the initial assumption is not the negation of the statement to be proved.
In this general sense, proof by contradiction is also known as indirect proof , proof by assuming the opposite ,  and reductio ad impossibile .
A mathematical proof employing proof by contradiction usually proceeds as follows:  The proposition to be proved is P .
We assume P to be false, i.e., we assume ¬P .
It is then shown that ¬P implies falsehood.
This is typically accomplished by deriving two mutually contradictory assertions, Q and ¬Q , and appealing to the law of noncontradiction .
Since assuming P to be false leads to a contradiction, it is concluded that P is in fact true.
An important special case is the existence proof by contradiction: in order to demonstrate that an object with a given property exists, we derive a contradiction from the assumption that all objects satisfy the negation of the property.
Formalization   The principle may be formally expressed as the propositional formula  ¬¬P ⇒ P , equivalently (¬P ⇒ ⊥) ⇒ P , which reads: "If assuming P to be false implies falsehood, then P is true."
In natural deduction the principle takes the form of the rule of inference               ⊢  ¬  ¬  P           ⊢  P         {\displaystyle {\cfrac {\vdash \lnot \lnot P}{\vdash P}}}    which reads: "If     ¬  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot \lnot P}   is proved, then     P    {\displaystyle P}   may be concluded."
In sequent calculus the principle is expressed by the sequent      Γ  ,  ¬  ¬  P  ⊢  P  ,  Δ    {\displaystyle \Gamma ,\lnot \lnot P\vdash P,\Delta }    which reads: "Hypotheses     Γ    {\displaystyle \Gamma }    and      ¬  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \lnot \lnot P}   entail the conclusion     P    {\displaystyle P}    or      Δ    {\displaystyle \Delta }   ."
Justification   In classical logic the principle may be justified by the examination of the truth table of the proposition ¬¬P ⇒ P , which demonstrates it to be a tautology :   p   ¬p   ¬¬p   ¬¬p ⇒ p    T  F  T  T   F  T  F  T  Another way to justify the principle is to derive it from the law of the excluded middle , as follows.
We assume ¬¬P and seek to prove P .
By the law of excluded middle P either holds or it does not:  if P holds, then of course P holds.
if ¬P holds, then we derive falsehood by applying the law of noncontradiction to ¬P and ¬¬P , after which the principle of explosion allows us to conclude P .
In either case, we established P .
It turns out that, conversely, proof by contradiction can be used to derive the law of excluded middle.
In classical sequent calculus LK proof by contradiction is derivable from the inference rules for negation:                                         Γ  ,  P  ⊢  P  ,  Δ        (  I  )           Γ  ,  ⊢  ¬  P  ,  P  ,  Δ        (   ¬   R  )           Γ  ,  ¬  ¬  P  ⊢  P  ,  Δ        (   ¬   L  )    {\displaystyle {\cfrac {{\cfrac {{\cfrac {\ }{\Gamma ,P\vdash P,\Delta }}\;(I)}{\Gamma ,\vdash \lnot P,P,\Delta }}\;({\lnot }R)}{\Gamma ,\lnot \lnot P\vdash P,\Delta }}\;({\lnot }L)}    Relationship with other proof techniques   Refutation by contradiction   Proof by contradiction is similar to refutation by contradiction ,   also known as proof of negation , which states that ¬P is proved as follows:  The proposition to be proved is ¬P .
Assume P .
Derive falsehood.
Conclude ¬P .
In contrast, proof by contradiction proceeds as follows:  The proposition to be proved is P .
Assume ¬P .
Conclude P .
Formally these are not the same, as refutation by contradiction applies only when the proposition to be proved is negated, whereas proof by contradiction may be applied to any proposition whatsoever.
In classical logic, where     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     ¬  ¬  P    {\displaystyle \neg \neg P}   may be freely interchanged, the distinction is largely obscured.
Thus in mathematical practice, both principles are referred to as "proof by contradiction".
Law of the excluded middle   Main article: Law of excluded middle  Proof by contradiction is equivalent to the law of the excluded middle , first formulated by Aristotle , which states that either an assertion or its negation is true, P ∨ ¬P .
Law of non-contradiction   The law of noncontradiction was first stated as a metaphysical principle by Aristotle .
It posits that a proposition and its negation cannot both be true, or equivalently, that a proposition cannot be both true and false.
Formally the law of non-contradiction is written as ¬(P ∧ ¬P) and read as "it is not the case that a proposition is both true and false".
The law of non-contradiction neither follows nor is implied by the principle of Proof by contradiction.
The laws of excluded middle and non-contradiction together mean that exactly one of P and ¬P is true.
Proof by contradiction in intuitionistic logic   In intuitionistic logic proof by contradiction is not generally valid, although some particular instances can be derived.
In contrast, proof of negation and principle of noncontradiction are both intuitionistically valid.
Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov interpretation of proof by contradiction gives the following intuitionistic validity condition:  "If there is no method for establishing that a proposition is false, then there is a method for establishing that the proposition is true."
If we take "method" to mean algorithm , then the condition is not acceptable, as it would allow us to solve the Halting problem .
To see how, consider the statement H(M) stating " Turing machine  M halts or does not halt".
Its negation ¬H(M) states that " M neither halts nor does not halt", which is false by the law of noncontradiction (which is intuitionistically valid).
If proof by contradiction were intuitionistically valid, we would obtain an algorithm for deciding whether an arbitrary Turing machine M halts, thereby violating the (intuitionistically valid) proof of non-solvability of the Halting problem .
A proposition P which satisfies     ¬  ¬  P  ⇒  P    {\displaystyle \lnot \lnot P\Rightarrow P}   is known as a ¬¬-stable proposition .
Thus in intuitionistic logic proof by contradiction is not universally valid, but can only be applied to the ¬¬-stable propositions.
An instance of such a proposition is a decidable one, i.e., satisfying     P  ∨  ¬  P    {\displaystyle P\lor \lnot P}   .
Indeed, the above proof that the law of excluded middle implies proof by contradiction can be repurposed to show that a decidable proposition is ¬¬-stable.
A typical  example of a decidable proposition is a statement that can be checked by direct computation, such as "     n    {\displaystyle n}   is prime" or "     a    {\displaystyle a}   divides     b    {\displaystyle b}   ".
Examples of proofs by contradiction   Euclid's Elements   An early occurrence of proof by contradiction can be found in Euclid's Elements , Book 1, Proposition 6:    If in a triangle two angles equal one another, then the sides opposite the equal angles also equal one another.
The proof proceeds by assuming that the opposite sides are not equal, and derives a contradiction.
Hilbert's Nullstellensatz   An influential proof by contradiction was given by David Hilbert .
His Nullstellensatz states:  If      f   1    ,  …  ,   f   k      {\displaystyle f_{1},\ldots ,f_{k}}   are polynomials in n indeterminates with complex coefficients, which have no common complex zeros , then there are polynomials      g   1    ,  …  ,   g   k      {\displaystyle g_{1},\ldots ,g_{k}}   such that      f   1     g   1    +  …  +   f   k     g   k    =  1.
{\displaystyle f_{1}g_{1}+\ldots +f_{k}g_{k}=1.}
Hilbert proved the statement by assuming that there are no such polynomials      g   1    ,  …  ,   g   k      {\displaystyle g_{1},\ldots ,g_{k}}   and derived a contradiction.
Infinitude of primes   Euclid's theorem states that there are infinitely many primes.
In Euclid's Elements the theorem is stated in Book IX, Proposition 20:    Prime numbers are more than any assigned multitude of prime numbers.
Depending on how we formally write the above statement, the usual proof takes either the form of a proof by contradiction or a refutation by contradiction.
We present here the former, see below how the proof is done as refutation by contradiction.
If we formally express Euclid's theorem as saying that for every natural number     n    {\displaystyle n}   there is a prime bigger than it, then we employ proof by contradiction, as follows.
Given any number     n    {\displaystyle n}   , we seek to prove that there is a prime larger than     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
Suppose to the contrary that no such p exists (an application of proof by contradiction).
Then all primes are smaller than or equal to     n    {\displaystyle n}   , and we may form the list      p   1    ,  …  ,   p   k      {\displaystyle p_{1},\ldots ,p_{k}}   of them all.
Let     P  =   p   1    ⋅  …  ⋅   p   k      {\displaystyle P=p_{1}\cdot \ldots \cdot p_{k}}   be the product of all primes and     Q  =  P  +  1    {\displaystyle Q=P+1}   .
Because     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   is larger than all prime numbers it is not prime, hence it must be divisible by one of them, say      p   i      {\displaystyle p_{i}}   .
Now both     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   are divisible by      p   i      {\displaystyle p_{i}}   , hence so is their difference     Q  −  P  =  1    {\displaystyle Q-P=1}   , but this cannot be because 1 is not divisible by any primes.
Hence we have a contradiction and so there is a prime number bigger than     n    {\displaystyle n}     Examples of refutations by contradiction   The following examples are commonly referred to as proofs by contradiction, but formally employ refutation by contradiction (and therefore are intuitionistically valid).
Infinitude of primes   Let us take a second look at Euclid's theorem – Book IX, Proposition 20:    Prime numbers are more than any assigned multitude of prime numbers.
We may read the statement as saying that for every finite list of primes, there is another prime not on that list,
which is arguably closer to and in the same spirit as Euclid's original formulation.
In this case Euclid's proof applies refutation by contradiction at one step, as follows.
Given any finite list of prime numbers      p   1    ,  …  ,   p   n      {\displaystyle p_{1},\ldots ,p_{n}}   , it will be shown that at least one additional prime number not in this list exists.
Let     P  =   p   1    ⋅   p   2    ⋯   p   n      {\displaystyle P=p_{1}\cdot p_{2}\cdots p_{n}}   be the product of all the listed primes and     p    {\displaystyle p}   a prime factor of     P  +  1    {\displaystyle P+1}   , possibly     P  +  1    {\displaystyle P+1}   itself.
We claim that     p    {\displaystyle p}   is not in the given list of primes.
Suppose to the contrary that it were (an application of refutation by contradiction).
Then     p    {\displaystyle p}   would divide both     P    {\displaystyle P}   and     P  +  1    {\displaystyle P+1}   , therefore also their difference, which is     1    {\displaystyle 1}   .
This gives a contradiction, since no prime number divides 1.
Irrationality of the square root of 2   The classic proof that the square root of 2 is irrational is a refutation by contradiction.
Indeed, we set out to prove the negation ¬ ∃ a, b ∈      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   .
a/b = √ 2 by assuming that there exist natural numbers a and b whose ratio is the square root of two, and derive a contradiction.
Proof by infinite descent   Proof by infinite descent is a method of proof whereby a smallest object with desired property is shown not to exist as follows:  Assume that there is a smallest object with the desired property.
Demonstrate that an even smaller object with the desired property exists, thereby deriving a contradiction.
Such a proof is again a refutation by contradiction.
A typical example is the proof of the proposition "there is no smallest positive rational number": assume there is a smallest positive rational number q and derive a contradiction by observing that q / 2 is even smaller than q and still positive.
Russell's paradox   Russell's paradox , stated set-theoretically as "there is no set whose elements are precisely those sets that do not contain themselves", is a negated statement whose usual proof is a refutation by contradiction.
Notation   Proofs by contradiction sometimes end with the word "Contradiction!".
Isaac Barrow and Baermann used the notation Q.E.A., for " quod est absurdum " ("which is absurd"), along the lines of Q.E.D.
, but this notation is rarely used today.
A graphical symbol sometimes used for contradictions is a downwards zigzag arrow "lightning" symbol (U+21AF: ↯), for example in Davey and Priestley.
Others sometimes used include a pair of opposing arrows (as     →   ←    {\displaystyle \rightarrow \!\leftarrow }    or     ⇒   ⇐    {\displaystyle \Rightarrow \!\Leftarrow }   ),  struck-out arrows (     ↮    {\displaystyle \nleftrightarrow }   ),  a stylized form of hash (such as U+2A33: ⨳),  or the "reference mark" (U+203B: ※),  or     ×      ×    {\displaystyle \times \!\!\!\!\times }   .
Hardy's view   G.
H.
Hardy described proof by contradiction as "one of a mathematician's finest weapons", saying "It is a far finer gambit than any chess gambit : a chess player may offer the sacrifice of a pawn or even a piece, but a mathematician offers the game."
Automated theorem proving   In automated theorem proving the method of resolution is based on proof by contradiction.
That is, in order to show that a given statement is entailed by given hypotheses, the automated prover assumes the hypotheses and the negation of the statement, and attempts to derive a contradiction.
Argument that leads to a logical absurdity  Reductio ad absurdum , painting by John Pettie exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1884  In logic , reductio ad absurdum ( Latin for "reduction to absurdity"), also known as argumentum ad absurdum ( Latin for "argument to absurdity") or apagogical arguments , is the form of argument that attempts to establish a claim by showing that the opposite scenario would lead to absurdity or contradiction.
This argument form traces back to Ancient Greek philosophy and has been used throughout history in both formal mathematical and philosophical reasoning, as well as in debate.
The equivalent formal rule is known as negation introduction .
A related mathematical proof technique is called proof by contradiction .
Examples   The "absurd" conclusion of a reductio ad absurdum argument can take a range of forms, as these examples show:  The Earth cannot be flat; otherwise, since the Earth is assumed to be finite in extent, we would find people falling off the edge.
There is no smallest positive rational number because, if there were, then it could be divided by two to get a smaller one.
The first example argues that denial of the premise would result in a ridiculous conclusion, against the evidence of our senses.
The second example is a mathematical proof by contradiction (also known as an indirect proof  ), which argues that the denial of the premise would result in a logical contradiction (there is a "smallest" number and yet there is a number smaller than it).
Greek philosophy   Reductio ad absurdum was used throughout Greek philosophy .
The earliest example of a reductio argument can be found in a satirical poem attributed to Xenophanes of Colophon (c.
570 – c.
475 BCE ).
Criticizing Homer 's attribution of human faults to the gods, Xenophanes states that humans also believe that the gods' bodies have human form.
But if horses and oxen could draw, they would draw the gods with horse and ox bodies.
The gods cannot have both forms, so this is a contradiction.
Therefore, the attribution of other human characteristics to the gods, such as human faults, is also false.
Greek mathematicians proved fundamental propositions using reductio ad absurdum .
Euclid of Alexandria (mid-4th – mid-3rd centuries BCE) and Archimedes of Syracuse (c.
287 – c.
212 BCE) are two very early examples.
The earlier dialogues of Plato (424–348 BCE), relating the discourses of Socrates , raised the use of reductio arguments to a formal dialectical method ( elenchus ), also called the Socratic method .
Typically, Socrates' opponent would make what would seem to be an innocuous assertion.
In response, Socrates, via a step-by-step train of reasoning, bringing in other background assumptions, would make the person admit that the assertion resulted in an absurd or contradictory conclusion, forcing him to abandon his assertion and adopt a position of aporia .
The technique was also a focus of the work of Aristotle (384–322 BCE), particularly in his Prior Analytics where he referred to it as demonstration to the impossible ( Greek : ἡ εἰς τὸ ἀδύνατον ἀπόδειξις , lit.
"demonstration to the impossible", 62b).
Another example of this technique is found in the sorites paradox , where it was argued that if 1,000,000 grains of sand formed a heap, and removing one grain from a heap left it a heap, then a single grain of sand (or even no grains) forms a heap.
Buddhist philosophy   Much of Madhyamaka  Buddhist philosophy centers on showing how various essentialist ideas have absurd conclusions through reductio ad absurdum arguments (known as prasaṅga , "consequence" in Sanskrit).
In the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā , Nāgārjuna 's reductio ad absurdum arguments are used to show that any theory of substance or essence was unsustainable and therefore, phenomena ( dharmas ) such as change, causality, and sense perception were empty ( sunya ) of any essential existence.
Nāgārjuna's main goal is often seen by scholars as refuting the essentialism of certain Buddhist Abhidharma schools (mainly Vaibhasika ) which posited theories of svabhava (essential nature) and also the Hindu Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika schools which posited a theory of ontological substances ( dravyatas ).
Example from Nāgārjuna's Mūlamadhyamakakārikā   In 13.5, Nagarjuna wishes to demonstrate consequences of the presumption that things essentially, or inherently, exist, pointing out that if a "young man" exists in himself then it follows he cannot grow old (because he would no longer be a "young man").
As we attempt to separate the man from his properties (youth), we find that everything is subject to momentary change, and are left with nothing beyond the merely arbitrary convention that such entities as "young man" depend upon.
13:5   A thing itself does not change.
Something different does not change.
Because a young man does not grow old.
And because an old man does not grow old either.
Principle of non-contradiction   Aristotle clarified the connection between contradiction and falsity in his principle of non-contradiction , which states that a proposition cannot be both true and false.
That is, a proposition     Q    {\displaystyle Q}   and its negation     ¬  Q    {\displaystyle \lnot Q}   (not- Q ) cannot both be true.
Therefore, if a proposition and its negation can both be derived logically from a premise, it can be concluded that the premise is false.
This technique, known as indirect proof or proof by contradiction ,  has formed the basis of reductio ad absurdum arguments in formal fields such as logic and mathematics.
Logical incompatibility between two or more propositions  For other uses, see Contradiction (disambiguation) .
Find sources:  "Contradiction" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( July 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  This diagram shows the contradictory relationships between categorical propositions in the square of opposition of Aristotelian logic .
In traditional logic , a contradiction occurs when a proposition conflicts either with itself or established fact .
It is often used as a tool to detect disingenuous beliefs and bias .
Illustrating a general tendency in applied logic, Aristotle 's law of noncontradiction states that "It is impossible that the same thing can at the same time both belong and not belong to the same object and in the same respect."
In modern formal logic and type theory , the term is mainly used instead for a single proposition, often denoted by the falsum symbol     ⊥    {\displaystyle \bot }   ; a proposition is a contradiction if false can be derived from it, using the rules of the logic.
It is a proposition that is unconditionally false (i.e., a self-contradictory proposition).
This can be generalized to a collection of propositions, which is then said to "contain" a contradiction.
History   By creation of a paradox , Plato 's Euthydemus dialogue demonstrates the need for the notion of contradiction .
In the ensuing dialogue, Dionysodorus denies the existence of "contradiction", all the while that Socrates is contradicting him:  ...
I in my astonishment said: What do you mean Dionysodorus?
I have often heard, and have been amazed to hear, this thesis of yours, which is maintained and employed by the disciples of Protagoras and others before them, and which to me appears to be quite wonderful, and suicidal as well as destructive, and I think that I am most likely to hear the truth about it from you.
The dictum is that there is no such thing as a falsehood; a man must either say what is true or say nothing.
Is not that your position?
Indeed, Dionysodorus agrees that "there is no such thing as false opinion ...
there is no such thing as ignorance", and demands of Socrates to "Refute me."
Socrates responds "But how can I refute you, if, as you say, to tell a falsehood is impossible?".
In formal logic   Note: The symbol     ⊥    {\displaystyle \bot }   ( falsum ) represents an arbitrary contradiction, with the dual tee symbol     ⊤    {\displaystyle \top }   used to denote an arbitrary tautology.
Contradiction is sometimes symbolized by "O pq ", and tautology by "V pq ".
The turnstile symbol,     ⊢    {\displaystyle \vdash }   is often read as "yields" or "proves".
In classical logic, particularly in propositional and first-order logic , a proposition     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   is a contradiction if and only if      φ  ⊢  ⊥    {\displaystyle \varphi \vdash \bot }   .
Since for contradictory     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   it is true that     ⊢  φ  →  ψ    {\displaystyle \vdash \varphi \rightarrow \psi }   for all     ψ    {\displaystyle \psi }   (because     ⊥  ⊢  ψ    {\displaystyle \bot \vdash \psi }   ), one may prove any proposition from a set of axioms which contains contradictions.
This is called the " principle of explosion ", or "ex falso quodlibet" ("from falsity, anything follows").
In a complete logic, a formula is contradictory if and only if it is unsatisfiable .
Proof by contradiction   Main article: Proof by contradiction  For a set of consistent premises     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   and a proposition     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   , it is true in classical logic that     Σ  ⊢  φ    {\displaystyle \Sigma \vdash \varphi }   (i.e.,     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   proves     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   ) if and only if     Σ  ∪  {  ¬  φ  }  ⊢  ⊥    {\displaystyle \Sigma \cup \{\neg \varphi \}\vdash \bot }   (i.e.,     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   and     ¬  φ    {\displaystyle \neg \varphi }   leads to a contradiction).
Therefore, a proof that     Σ  ∪  {  ¬  φ  }  ⊢  ⊥    {\displaystyle \Sigma \cup \{\neg \varphi \}\vdash \bot }   also proves that     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   is true under the premises     Σ    {\displaystyle \Sigma }   .
The use of this fact forms the basis of a proof technique called proof by contradiction , which mathematicians use extensively to establish the validity of a wide range of theorems.
This applies only in a logic where the law of excluded middle      A  ∨  ¬  A    {\displaystyle A\vee \neg A}   is accepted as an axiom.
Using minimal logic , a logic with similar axioms to classical logic but without ex falso quodlibet and proof by contradiction, we can investigate the axiomatic strength and properties of various rules that treat contradiction by considering theorems of classical logic that are not theorems of minimal logic.
Each of these extensions leads to an intermediate logic :  Double-negation elimination (DNE) is the strongest principle, axiomatized     ¬  ¬  A   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle \neg \neg A\implies A}   , and when it is added to minimal logic yields classical logic.
Ex falso quodlibet (EFQ), axiomatized     ⊥   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle \bot \implies A}   , licenses many consequences of negations, but typically does not help to infer propositions that do not involve absurdity from consistent propositions that do.
When added to minimal logic, EFQ yields intuitionistic logic .
EFQ is equivalent to ex contradiction quodlibet , axiomatized     A  ∧  ¬  A   ⟹   B    {\displaystyle A\land \neg A\implies B}   , over minimal logic.
Peirce's rule (PR) is an axiom     (  (  A   ⟹   B  )   ⟹   A  )   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle ((A\implies B)\implies A)\implies A}   that captures proof by contradiction without explicitly referring to absurdity.
Minimal logic + PR + EFQ yields classical logic.
The Gödel-Dummett (GD) axiom     A   ⟹   B  ∨  B   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle A\implies B\vee B\implies A}   , whose most simple reading is that there is a linear order on truth values.
Minimal logic + GD yields Gödel-Dummett logic .
Peirce's rule entails but is not entailed by GD over minimal logic.
Law of the excluded middle (LEM), axiomatised     A  ∨  ¬  A    {\displaystyle A\vee \neg A}   , is the most often cited formulation of the principle of bivalence , but in the absence of EFQ it does not yield full classical logic.
Minimal logic + LEM + EFQ yields classical logic.
PR entails but is not entailed by LEM in minimal logic.
If the formula B in Peirce's rule is restricted to absurdity, giving the axiom schema     (  ¬  A   ⟹   A  )   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle (\neg A\implies A)\implies A}   , the scheme is equivalent to LEM over minimal logic.
Weak law of the excluded middle (WLEM) is axiomatised     ¬  A  ∨  ¬  ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg A\vee \neg \neg A}   and yields a system where disjunction behaves more like in classical logic than intuitionistic logic, i.e.
the disjunction and existence properties don't hold, but where use of non-intuitionistic reasoning is marked by occurrences of double-negation in the conclusion.
LEM entails but is not entailed by WLEM in minimal logic.
WLEM is equivalent to the instance of De Morgan's law that distributes negation over conjunction:     ¬  (  A  ∧  B  )   ⟺   (  ¬  A  )  ∨  (  ¬  B  )    {\displaystyle \neg (A\land B)\iff (\neg A)\vee (\neg B)}   .
Symbolic representation   In mathematics, the symbol used to represent a contradiction within a proof varies.
Some symbols that may be used to represent a contradiction include ↯, Opq,     ⇒ ⇐    {\displaystyle \Rightarrow \Leftarrow }   , ⊥,     ↔             {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow \ \!\!\!\!\!\!\!}
/ , and ※; in any symbolism, a contradiction may be substituted for the truth value " false ", as symbolized, for instance, by "0" (as is common in Boolean algebra ).
It is not uncommon to see Q.E.D.
, or some of its variants, immediately after a contradiction symbol.
In fact, this often occurs in a proof by contradiction to indicate that the original assumption was proved false—and hence that its negation must be true.
The notion of contradiction in an axiomatic system and a proof of its consistency   In general, a consistency proof requires the following two things:  An axiomatic system  A demonstration that it is not the case that both the formula p and its negation ~p can be derived in the system.
But by whatever method one goes about it, all consistency proofs would seem to necessitate the primitive notion of contradiction.
Moreover, it seems as if this notion would simultaneously have to be "outside" the formal system in the definition of tautology.
When Emil Post , in his 1921 "Introduction to a General Theory of Elementary Propositions", extended his proof of the consistency of the propositional calculus (i.e.
the logic) beyond that of Principia Mathematica (PM), he observed that with respect to a generalized set of postulates (i.e.
axioms), he would no longer be able to automatically invoke the notion of "contradiction"—such a notion might not be contained in the postulates:  The prime requisite of a set of postulates is that it be consistent.
Since the ordinary notion of consistency involves that of contradiction, which again involves negation, and since this function does not appear in general as a primitive in  a new definition must be given.
Post's solution to the problem is described in the demonstration "An Example of a Successful Absolute Proof of Consistency", offered by Ernest Nagel and James R.
Newman in their 1958 Gödel 's Proof .
They too observed a problem with respect to the notion of "contradiction" with its usual "truth values" of "truth" and "falsity".
They observed that:  The property of being a tautology has been defined in notions of truth and falsity.
Yet these notions obviously involve a reference to something outside the formula calculus.
Therefore, the procedure mentioned in the text in effect offers an interpretation of the calculus, by supplying a model for the system.
This being so, the authors have not done what they promised, namely, " to define a property of formulas in terms of purely structural features of the formulas themselves ".
...
proofs of consistency which are based on models, and which argue from the truth of axioms to their consistency, merely shift the problem.
Given some "primitive formulas" such as PM's primitives S 1 V S 2  and ~S (negation), one is forced to define the axioms in terms of these primitive notions.
In a thorough manner, Post demonstrates in PM, and defines (as do Nagel and Newman, see below) that the property of tautologous – as yet to be defined – is "inherited": if one begins with a set of tautologous axioms (postulates) and a deduction system that contains substitution and modus ponens , then a consistent system will yield only tautologous formulas.
On the topic of the definition of tautologous , Nagel and Newman create two mutually exclusive and exhaustive classes K 1 and K 2 , into which fall (the outcome of) the axioms when their variables (e.g.
S 1 and S 2 are assigned from these classes).
This also applies to the primitive formulas.
For example: "A formula having the form S 1 V S 2 is placed into class K 2 , if both S 1 and S 2 are in K 2 ; otherwise it is placed in K 1 ", and "A formula having the form ~S is placed in K 2 , if S is in K 1 ; otherwise it is placed in K 1 ".
Hence Nagel and Newman can now define the notion of tautologous : "a formula is a tautology if and only if it falls in the class K 1 , no matter in which of the two classes its elements are placed".
This way, the property of "being tautologous" is described—without reference to a model or an interpretation.
For example, given a formula such as ~S 1 V S 2 and an assignment of K 1 to S 1 and K 2 to S 2 one can evaluate the formula and place its outcome in one or the other of the classes.
The assignment of K 1 to S 1 places ~S 1 in K 2 , and now we can see that our assignment causes the formula to fall into class K 2 .
Thus by definition our formula is not a tautology.
Post observed that, if the system were inconsistent, a deduction in it (that is, the last formula in a sequence of formulas derived from the tautologies) could ultimately yield S itself.
As an assignment to variable S can come from either class K 1 or K 2 , the deduction violates the inheritance characteristic of tautology (i.e., the derivation must yield an evaluation of a formula that will fall into class K 1 ).
From this, Post was able to derive the following definition of inconsistency— without the use of the notion of contradiction :  Definition.
A system will be said to be inconsistent if it yields the assertion of the unmodified variable p .
In other words, the notion of "contradiction" can be dispensed when constructing a proof of consistency; what replaces it is the notion of "mutually exclusive and exhaustive" classes.
An axiomatic system need not include the notion of "contradiction".
: 177   Philosophy   Adherents of the epistemological theory of coherentism typically claim that as a necessary condition of the justification of a belief , that belief must form a part of a logically non-contradictory system of beliefs.
Some dialetheists , including Graham Priest , have argued that coherence may not require consistency.
Pragmatic contradictions   A pragmatic contradiction occurs when the very statement of the argument contradicts the claims it purports.
An inconsistency arises, in this case, because the act of utterance, rather than the content of what is said, undermines its conclusion.
Dialectical materialism   In dialectical materialism :  Contradiction—as derived from Hegelianism —usually refers to an opposition inherently existing within one realm, one unified force or object.
This contradiction, as opposed to metaphysical thinking, is not an objectively impossible thing, because these contradicting forces exist in objective reality, not cancelling each other out, but actually defining each other's existence.
According to Marxist theory , such a contradiction can be found, for example, in the fact that:  (a) enormous wealth and productive powers coexist alongside:  (b) extreme poverty and misery;  (c) the existence of (a) being contrary to the existence of (b).
Hegelian and Marxist theories stipulate that the dialectic nature of history will lead to the sublation , or synthesis , of its contradictions.
Marx therefore postulated that history would logically make capitalism evolve into a socialist society where the means of production would equally serve the working and producing class of society, thus resolving the prior contradiction between (a) and (b).
Outside formal logic   Colloquial usage can label actions or statements as contradicting each other when due (or perceived as due) to presuppositions which are contradictory in the logical sense.
Proof by contradiction is used in mathematics to construct proofs .
The scientific method uses contradiction to falsify bad theory.
Two numbers without shared prime factors  In number theory , two integers  a and b are coprime , relatively prime or mutually prime if the only positive integer that is a divisor of both of them is 1.
Consequently, any prime number that divides a does not divide b , and vice versa.
This is equivalent to their greatest common divisor (GCD) being 1.
One says also a  is prime to  b or a  is coprime with  b .
The numbers 8 and 9 are coprime, despite the fact that neither—considered individually—is a prime number, since 1 is their only  common divisor.
On the other hand, 6 and 9 are not coprime, because they are both divisible by 3.
The numerator and denominator of a reduced fraction are coprime, by definition.
Notation and testing   When the integers a and b are coprime, the standard way of expressing this fact in mathematical notation is to indicate that their greatest common divisor is one, by the formula gcd( a , b ) = 1 or ( a , b ) = 1 .
In their 1989 textbook Concrete Mathematics , Ronald Graham , Donald Knuth , and Oren Patashnik proposed an alternative notation     a  ⊥  b    {\displaystyle a\perp b}   to indicate that a and b are relatively prime and that the term "prime" be used instead of coprime (as in a is prime to b ).
A fast way to determine whether two numbers are coprime is given by the Euclidean algorithm and its faster variants such as binary GCD algorithm or Lehmer's GCD algorithm .
The number of integers coprime with a positive integer n , between 1 and n , is given by Euler's totient function , also known as Euler's phi function, φ ( n ) .
A set of integers can also be called coprime if its elements share no common positive factor except 1.
A stronger condition on a set of integers is pairwise coprime, which means that a and b are coprime for every pair ( a , b ) of different integers in the set.
The set {2, 3, 4} is coprime, but it is not pairwise coprime since 2 and 4 are not relatively prime.
Properties   The numbers 1 and −1 are the only integers coprime with every integer, and they are the only integers that are coprime with 0.
A number of conditions are equivalent to a and b being coprime:  No prime number divides both a and b .
There exist integers x, y such that ax + by = 1 (see Bézout's identity ).
The integer b has a multiplicative inverse modulo a , meaning that there exists an integer y such that by ≡ 1 (mod a ) .
In ring-theoretic language, b is a unit in the ring       Z    /   a   Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} /a\mathbb {Z} }   of integers modulo  a .
Every pair of congruence relations for an unknown integer x , of the form x ≡ k (mod a ) and x ≡ m (mod b ) , has a solution ( Chinese remainder theorem ); in fact the solutions are described by a single congruence relation modulo ab .
The least common multiple of a and b is equal to their product ab , i.e.
lcm( a , b ) = ab .
As a consequence of the third point, if a and b are coprime and br ≡ bs (mod a ) , then r ≡ s (mod a ) .
That is, we may "divide by b " when working modulo a .
Furthermore, if b 1 , b 2 are both coprime with a , then so is their product b 1 b 2 (i.e., modulo a it is a product of invertible elements, and therefore invertible);  this also follows from the first point by Euclid's lemma , which states that if a prime number p divides a product bc , then p divides at least one of the factors b, c .
As a consequence of the first point, if a and b are coprime, then so are any powers a k and b m .
If a and b are coprime and a divides the product bc , then a divides c .
This can be viewed as a generalization of Euclid's lemma.
Figure 1.
The numbers 4 and 9 are coprime.
Therefore, the diagonal of a 4 × 9 lattice does not intersect any other lattice points  The two integers a and b are coprime if and only if the point with coordinates ( a , b ) in a Cartesian coordinate system would be  "visible" via an unobstructed line of sight from the origin (0, 0) , in the sense that there is no point with integer coordinates anywhere on the line segment  between the origin and ( a , b ) .
(See figure 1.)
In a sense that can be made precise, the probability that two randomly chosen integers are coprime is 6/ π 2 , which is about 61% (see § Probability of coprimality , below).
Two natural numbers  a and b are coprime if and only if the numbers 2 a – 1 and 2 b – 1 are coprime.
As a generalization of this, following easily from the Euclidean algorithm in base  n > 1 :      gcd   (    n   a    −  1  ,   n   b    −  1   )   =   n   gcd  (  a  ,  b  )    −  1.
{\displaystyle \gcd \left(n^{a}-1,n^{b}-1\right)=n^{\gcd(a,b)}-1.}
Coprimality in sets   A set of integers     S  =  {   a   1    ,   a   2    ,  …  ,   a   n    }    {\displaystyle S=\{a_{1},a_{2},\dots ,a_{n}\}}   can also be called coprime or setwise coprime if the greatest common divisor of all the elements of the set is 1.
For example, the integers 6, 10, 15 are coprime because 1 is the only positive integer that divides all of them.
If every pair in a set of integers is coprime, then the set is said to be pairwise coprime (or pairwise relatively prime , mutually coprime or mutually relatively prime ).
Pairwise coprimality is a stronger condition than setwise coprimality; every pairwise coprime finite set is also setwise coprime, but the reverse is not true.
For example, the integers 4, 5, 6 are (setwise) coprime (because the only positive integer dividing all of them is 1), but they are not pairwise coprime (because gcd(4, 6) = 2 ).
The concept of pairwise coprimality is important as a hypothesis in many results in number theory, such as the Chinese remainder theorem .
It is possible for an infinite set of integers to be pairwise coprime.
Notable examples include the set of all prime numbers, the set of elements in Sylvester's sequence , and the set of all Fermat numbers .
Coprimality in ring ideals   Two ideals  A and B in a commutative ring  R are called coprime (or comaximal ) if     A  +  B  =  R  .
{\displaystyle A+B=R.}
This generalizes Bézout's identity : with this definition, two principal ideals ( a ) and ( b ) in the ring of integers      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   are coprime if and only if a and b are coprime.
If the ideals A and B of R are coprime, then     A  B  =  A  ∩  B  ;    {\displaystyle AB=A\cap B;}   furthermore, if C is a third ideal such that A contains BC , then A contains C .
The Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to any commutative ring, using coprime ideals.
Probability of coprimality   Given two randomly chosen integers a and b , it is reasonable to ask how likely it is that a and b are coprime.
In this determination, it is convenient to use the characterization that a and b are coprime if and only if no prime number divides both of them (see Fundamental theorem of arithmetic ).
Informally, the probability that any number is divisible by a prime (or in fact any integer) p is        1  p     ;    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{p}};}   for example, every 7th integer is divisible by 7.
Hence the probability that two numbers are both divisible by p is        1   p   2       ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{p^{2}}},}   and the probability that at least one of them is not is     1  −     1   p   2       .
{\displaystyle 1-{\tfrac {1}{p^{2}}}.}
Any finite collection of divisibility events associated to distinct primes is mutually independent.
For example, in the case of two events, a number is divisible by primes p and q if and only if it is divisible by pq ; the latter event has probability        1   p  q      .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{pq}}.}
If one makes the heuristic assumption that such reasoning can be extended to infinitely many divisibility events, one is led to guess that the probability that two numbers are coprime is given by a product over all primes,       ∏    prime   p     (   1  −    1   p   2       )   =    (    ∏    prime   p      1   1  −   p   −  2        )    −  1    =    1   ζ  (  2  )     =    6   π   2      ≈  0.607927102  ≈  61  %  .
{\displaystyle \prod _{{\text{prime }}p}\left(1-{\frac {1}{p^{2}}}\right)=\left(\prod _{{\text{prime }}p}{\frac {1}{1-p^{-2}}}\right)^{-1}={\frac {1}{\zeta (2)}}={\frac {6}{\pi ^{2}}}\approx 0.607927102\approx 61\%.}
Here ζ refers to the Riemann zeta function , the identity relating the product over primes to ζ (2) is an example of an Euler product , and the evaluation of ζ (2) as π 2 /6 is the Basel problem , solved by Leonhard Euler in 1735.
There is no way to choose a positive integer at random so that each positive integer occurs with equal probability, but statements about "randomly chosen integers" such as the ones above can be formalized by using the notion of natural density .
For each positive integer N , let P N be the probability that two randomly chosen numbers in     {  1  ,  2  ,  …  ,  N  }    {\displaystyle \{1,2,\ldots ,N\}}   are coprime.
Although P N will never equal 6/ π 2 exactly, with work  one can show that in the limit as     N  →  ∞  ,    {\displaystyle N\to \infty ,}   the probability P N approaches 6/ π 2 .
More generally, the probability of k randomly chosen integers being setwise coprime is        1   ζ  (  k  )      .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{\zeta (k)}}.}
Generating all coprime pairs   The tree rooted at (2, 1).
The root (2, 1) is marked red, its three children are shown in orange, third generation is yellow, and so on in the rainbow order.
All pairs of positive coprime numbers ( m , n ) (with m > n ) can be arranged in two disjoint complete ternary trees , one tree starting from (2, 1) (for even–odd and odd–even pairs),  and the other tree starting from (3, 1) (for odd–odd pairs).
The children of each vertex ( m , n ) are generated as follows:  Branch 1:     (  2  m  −  n  ,  m  )    {\displaystyle (2m-n,m)}    Branch 2:     (  2  m  +  n  ,  m  )    {\displaystyle (2m+n,m)}    Branch 3:     (  m  +  2  n  ,  n  )    {\displaystyle (m+2n,n)}    This scheme is exhaustive and non-redundant with no invalid members.
This can be proved by remarking that, if     (  a  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)}   is a coprime pair with     a  >  b  ,    {\displaystyle a>b,}   then  if     a  >  3  b  ,    {\displaystyle a>3b,}   then     (  a  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)}   is a child of     (  m  ,  n  )  =  (  a  −  2  b  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle (m,n)=(a-2b,b)}   along branch 3;  if     2  b  <  a  <  3  b  ,    {\displaystyle 2b<a<3b,}   then     (  a  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)}   is a child of     (  m  ,  n  )  =  (  b  ,  a  −  2  b  )    {\displaystyle (m,n)=(b,a-2b)}   along branch 2;  if     b  <  a  <  2  b  ,    {\displaystyle b<a<2b,}   then     (  a  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)}   is a child of     (  m  ,  n  )  =  (  b  ,  2  b  −  a  )    {\displaystyle (m,n)=(b,2b-a)}   along branch 1.
In all cases     (  m  ,  n  )    {\displaystyle (m,n)}   is a "smaller" coprime pair with     m  >  n  .
{\displaystyle m>n.}
This process of "computing the father" can stop only if either     a  =  2  b    {\displaystyle a=2b}   or     a  =  3  b  .
{\displaystyle a=3b.}
In these cases, coprimality, implies that the pair is either     (  2  ,  1  )    {\displaystyle (2,1)}   or     (  3  ,  1  )  .
{\displaystyle (3,1).}
Applications   In machine design, an even, uniform gear wear is achieved by choosing the tooth counts of the two gears meshing together to be relatively prime.
When a 1:1 gear ratio is desired, a gear relatively prime to the two equal-size gears may be inserted between them.
In pre-computer cryptography , some Vernam cipher machines combined several loops of key tape of different lengths.
Many rotor machines combine rotors of different numbers of teeth.
Such combinations work best when the entire set of lengths are pairwise coprime.
Generalizations   This concept can be extended to other algebraic structures than      Z   ;    {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} ;}   for example, polynomials whose greatest common divisor is 1 are called coprime polynomials .
Ratio of two numbers  For other uses, see Fraction (disambiguation) .
A cake with one quarter (one fourth) removed.
The remaining three fourths are shown by dotted lines and labeled by the fraction 1 / 4  A fraction (from Latin : fractus , "broken") represents a part of a whole or, more generally, any number of equal parts.
When spoken in everyday English, a fraction describes how many parts of a certain size there are, for example, one-half, eight-fifths, three-quarters.
A common , vulgar , or simple fraction (examples:        1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}   and        17  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {17}{3}}}   ) consists of an integer numerator , displayed above a line (or before a slash like 1 ⁄ 2 ), and a non-zero integer denominator , displayed below (or after) that line.
If these integers are positive, then the numerator represents a number of equal parts, and the denominator indicates how many of those parts make up a unit or a whole.
For example, in the fraction 3 / 4 , the numerator 3 indicates that the fraction represents 3 equal parts, and the denominator 4 indicates that 4 parts make up a whole.
The picture to the right illustrates 3 / 4 of a cake.
Other uses for fractions are to represent ratios and division .
Thus the fraction 3 / 4 can also be used to represent the ratio 3:4 (the ratio of the part to the whole), and the division 3 ÷ 4 (three divided by four).
We can also write negative fractions, which represent the opposite of a positive fraction.
For example, if 1 / 2 represents a half-dollar profit, then − 1 / 2 represents a half-dollar loss.
Because of the rules of division of signed numbers (which states in part that negative divided by positive is negative), − 1 / 2 , −1 / 2 and 1 / −2 all represent the same fraction –  negative one-half.
And because a negative divided by a negative produces a positive, −1 / −2 represents positive one-half.
In mathematics the set of all numbers that can be expressed in the form a / b , where a and b are integers and b is not zero, is called the set of rational numbers and is represented by the symbol Q or      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   , which stands for quotient .
A number is a rational number precisely when it can be written in that form (i.e., as a common fraction).
However, the word fraction can also be used to describe mathematical expressions that are not rational numbers.
Examples of these usages include algebraic fractions (quotients of algebraic expressions), and expressions that contain irrational numbers , such as        2   2      {\textstyle {\frac {\sqrt {2}}{2}}}   (see Square root of 2 ) and π / 4 (see Proof that π is irrational ).
Vocabulary  See also: Numeral (linguistics) § Fractional numbers , and English numerals § Fractions and decimals  In a fraction, the number of equal parts being described is the numerator (from Latin : numerātor , "counter" or "numberer"), and the type or variety of the parts is the denominator (from Latin : dēnōminātor , "thing that names or designates").
As an example, the fraction 8 / 5 amounts to eight parts, each of which is of the type named "fifth".
In terms of division , the numerator corresponds to the dividend , and the denominator corresponds to the divisor .
Informally, the numerator and denominator may be distinguished by placement alone, but in formal contexts they are usually separated by a fraction bar .
The fraction bar may be horizontal (as in 1 / 3 ), oblique (as in 2/5), or diagonal (as in 4 ⁄ 9 ).
These marks are respectively known as the horizontal bar; the virgule, slash ( US ), or stroke ( UK ); and the fraction bar, solidus,  or fraction slash .
In typography , fractions stacked vertically are also known as " en " or " nut fractions", and diagonal ones as " em " or "mutton fractions", based on whether a fraction with a single-digit numerator and denominator occupies the proportion of a narrow en square, or a wider em square.
In traditional typefounding , a piece of type bearing a complete fraction (e.g.
1 / 2 ) was known as a "case fraction", while those representing only part of fraction were called "piece fractions".
The denominators of English fractions are generally expressed as ordinal numbers , in the plural if the numerator is not 1.
(For example, 2 / 5 and 3 / 5 are both read as a number of "fifths".)
Exceptions include the denominator 2, which is always read "half" or "halves", the denominator 4, which may be alternatively expressed as "quarter"/"quarters" or as "fourth"/"fourths", and the denominator 100, which may be alternatively expressed as "hundredth"/"hundredths" or " percent ".
When the denominator is 1, it may be expressed in terms of "wholes" but is more commonly ignored, with the numerator read out as a whole number.
For example, 3 / 1 may be described as "three wholes", or simply as "three".
When the numerator is 1, it may be omitted (as in "a tenth" or "each quarter").
The entire fraction may be expressed as a single composition, in which case it is hyphenated, or as a number of fractions with a numerator of one, in which case they are not.
(For example, "two-fifths" is the fraction 2 / 5 and "two fifths" is the same fraction understood as 2 instances of 1 / 5 .)
Fractions should always be hyphenated when used as adjectives.
Alternatively, a fraction may be described by reading it out as the numerator "over" the denominator, with the denominator expressed as a cardinal number .
(For example, 3 / 1 may also be expressed as "three over one".)
The term "over" is used even in the case of solidus fractions, where the numbers are placed left and right of a slash mark .
(For example, 1/2 may be read "one-half", "one half", or "one over two".)
Fractions with large denominators that are not powers of ten are often rendered in this fashion (e.g., 1 / 117 as "one over one hundred seventeen"), while those with denominators divisible by ten are typically read in the normal ordinal fashion (e.g., 6 / 1000000 as "six-millionths", "six millionths", or "six one-millionths").
Forms of fractions  Simple, common, or vulgar fractions  A simple fraction (also known as a common fraction or vulgar fraction , where vulgar is Latin for "common") is a rational number written as a / b or        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   , where a and b are both integers .
As with other fractions, the denominator ( b ) cannot be zero.
Examples include 1 / 2 , − 8 / 5 , −8 / 5 , and 8 / −5 .
The term was originally used to distinguish this type of fraction from the sexagesimal fraction used in astronomy.
Common fractions can be positive or negative, and they can be proper or improper (see below).
Compound fractions, complex fractions, mixed numerals, and decimals (see below) are not common fractions ; though, unless irrational, they can be evaluated to a common fraction.
A unit fraction is a common fraction with a numerator of 1 (e.g., 1 / 7 ).
Unit fractions can also be expressed using negative exponents, as in 2 −1 , which represents 1/2, and 2 −2 , which represents 1/(2 2 ) or 1/4.
A dyadic fraction is a common fraction in which the denominator is a power of two , e.g.
1 / 8 = 1 / 2 3 .
In Unicode, precomposed fraction characters are in the Number Forms block.
Proper and improper fractions  Common fractions can be classified as either proper or improper.
When the numerator and the denominator are both positive, the fraction is called proper if the numerator is less than the denominator, and improper otherwise.
The concept of an "improper fraction" is a late development, with the terminology deriving from the fact that "fraction" means "a piece", so a proper fraction must be less than 1.
This was explained in the 17th century textbook The Ground of Arts .
In general, a common fraction is said to be a proper fraction , if the absolute value of the fraction is strictly less than one—that is, if the fraction is greater than −1 and less than 1.
It is said to be an improper fraction , or sometimes top-heavy fraction ,  if the absolute value of the fraction is greater than or equal to 1.
Examples of proper fractions are 2/3, −3/4, and 4/9, whereas examples of improper fractions are 9/4, −4/3, and 3/3.
Reciprocals and the "invisible denominator"  The reciprocal of a fraction is another fraction with the numerator and denominator exchanged.
The reciprocal of 3 / 7 , for instance, is 7 / 3 .
The product of a fraction and its reciprocal is 1, hence the reciprocal is the multiplicative inverse of a fraction.
The reciprocal of a proper fraction is improper, and the reciprocal of an improper fraction not equal to 1 (that is, numerator and denominator are not equal) is a proper fraction.
When the numerator and denominator of a fraction are equal (for example, 7 / 7 ), its value is 1, and the fraction therefore is improper.
Its reciprocal is identical and hence also equal to 1 and improper.
Any integer can be written as a fraction with the number one as denominator.
For example, 17 can be written as 17 / 1 , where 1 is sometimes referred to as the invisible denominator .
Therefore, every fraction or integer, except for zero, has a reciprocal.
For example.
the reciprocal of 17 is 1 / 17 .
Ratios  A ratio is a relationship between two or more numbers that can be sometimes expressed as a fraction.
Typically, a number of items are grouped and compared in a ratio, specifying numerically the relationship between each group.
Ratios are expressed as "group 1 to group 2 ...
to group n ".
For example, if a car lot had 12 vehicles, of which  2 are white,  6 are red, and  4 are yellow,  then the ratio of red to white to yellow cars is 6 to 2 to 4.
The ratio of yellow cars to white cars is 4 to 2 and may be expressed as 4:2 or 2:1.
A ratio is often converted to a fraction when it is expressed as a ratio to the whole.
In the above example, the ratio of yellow cars to all the cars on the lot is 4:12 or 1:3.
We can convert these ratios to a fraction, and say that 4 / 12 of the cars or 1 / 3 of the cars in the lot are yellow.
Therefore, if a person randomly chose one car on the lot, then there is a one in three chance or probability that it would be yellow.
Decimal fractions and percentages  A decimal fraction is a fraction whose denominator is not given explicitly, but is understood to be an integer power of ten.
Decimal fractions are commonly expressed using decimal notation in which the implied denominator is determined by the number of digits to the right of a decimal separator , the appearance of which (e.g., a period, an interpunct (·), a comma) depends on the locale (for examples, see Decimal separator ).
Thus, for 0.75 the numerator is 75 and the implied denominator is 10 to the second power, namely, 100, because there are two digits to the right of the decimal separator.
In decimal numbers greater than 1 (such as 3.75), the fractional part of the number is expressed by the digits to the right of the decimal (with a value of 0.75 in this case).
3.75 can be written either as an improper fraction, 375/100, or as a mixed number, 3 + 75 / 100 .
Decimal fractions can also be expressed using scientific notation with negative exponents, such as 6.023 × 10 −7 , which represents 0.0000006023.
The 10 −7 represents a denominator of 10 7 .
Dividing by 10 7 moves the decimal point 7 places to the left.
Decimal fractions with infinitely many digits to the right of the decimal separator represent an infinite series .
For example, 1 / 3 = 0.333...
represents the infinite series 3/10 + 3/100 + 3/1000 + ....
Another kind of fraction is the percentage (from Latin : per centum , meaning "per hundred", represented by the symbol %), in which the implied denominator is always 100.
Thus, 51% means 51/100.
Percentages greater than 100 or less than zero are treated in the same way, e.g.
311% equals 311/100, and −27% equals −27/100.
The related concept of permille or parts per thousand (ppt) has an implied denominator of 1000, while the more general parts-per notation , as in 75 parts per million (ppm), means that the proportion is 75/1,000,000.
Whether common fractions or decimal fractions are used is often a matter of taste and context.
Common fractions are used most often when the denominator is relatively small.
By mental calculation , it is easier to multiply 16 by 3/16 than to do the same calculation using the fraction's decimal equivalent (0.1875).
And it is more accurate to multiply 15 by 1/3, for example, than it is to multiply 15 by any decimal approximation of one third.
Monetary values are commonly expressed as decimal fractions with denominator 100, i.e., with two decimals, for example $3.75.
However, as noted above, in pre-decimal British currency, shillings and pence were often given the form (but not the meaning) of a fraction, as, for example, "3/6" (read "three and six") meaning 3 shillings and 6 pence, and having no relationship to the fraction 3/6.
Mixed numbers  A mixed number (also called a mixed fraction or mixed numeral ) is the sum of a non-zero integer and a proper fraction, conventionally written by juxtaposition (or concatenation ) of the two parts, without the use of an intermediate plus (+) or minus (−) sign.
When the fraction is written horizontally, a space is added between the integer and fraction to separate them.
As a basic example, two entire cakes and three quarters of another cake might be written as     2     3  4       {\displaystyle 2{\tfrac {3}{4}}}   cakes or     2     3   /   4    {\displaystyle 2\ \,3/4}   cakes, with the numeral     2    {\displaystyle 2}   representing the whole cakes and the fraction        3  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}}   representing the additional partial cake juxtaposed; this is more concise than the more explicit notation     2  +     3  4       {\displaystyle 2+{\tfrac {3}{4}}}   cakes.
The mixed number 2 + 3 / 4 is pronounced "two and three quarters", with the integer and fraction portions connected by the word and .
Subtraction or negation is applied to the entire mixed numeral, so     −  2     3  4       {\displaystyle -2{\tfrac {3}{4}}}   means     −    (    2  +     3  4       )    .
{\displaystyle -{\bigl (}2+{\tfrac {3}{4}}{\bigr )}.}
Any mixed number can be converted to an improper fraction by applying the rules of adding unlike quantities .
For example,     2  +     3  4     =     8  4     +     3  4     =     11  4     .
{\displaystyle 2+{\tfrac {3}{4}}={\tfrac {8}{4}}+{\tfrac {3}{4}}={\tfrac {11}{4}}.}
Conversely, an improper fraction can be converted to a mixed number using division with remainder , with the proper fraction consisting of the remainder divided by the divisor.
For example, since 4 goes into 11 twice, with 3 left over,        11  4     =  2  +     3  4     .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {11}{4}}=2+{\tfrac {3}{4}}.}
In primary school, teachers often insist that every fractional result should be expressed as a mixed number.
Outside school, mixed numbers are commonly used for describing measurements, for instance 2 + 1 / 2 hours or 5 3/16 inches , and remain widespread in daily life and in trades, especially in regions that do not use the decimalized metric system .
However, scientific measurements typically use the metric system, which is based on decimal fractions, and starting from the secondary school level, mathematics pedagogy treats every fraction uniformly as a rational number , the quotient p / q of integers, leaving behind the concepts of "improper fraction" and "mixed number".
College students with years of mathematical training are sometimes confused when re-encountering mixed numbers because they are used to the convention that juxtaposition in algebraic expressions means multiplication.
Historical notions  Egyptian fraction  An Egyptian fraction is the sum of distinct positive unit fractions, for example        1  2     +     1  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}+{\tfrac {1}{3}}}   .
This definition derives from the fact that the ancient Egyptians expressed all fractions except        1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}   ,        2  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}}   and        3  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}}   in this manner.
Every positive rational number can be expanded as an Egyptian fraction.
For example,        5  7       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{7}}}   can be written as        1  2     +     1  6     +     1  21     .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}+{\tfrac {1}{6}}+{\tfrac {1}{21}}.}
Any positive rational number can be written as a sum of unit fractions in infinitely many ways.
Two ways to write        13  17       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {13}{17}}}   are        1  2     +     1  4     +     1  68       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}+{\tfrac {1}{4}}+{\tfrac {1}{68}}}   and        1  3     +     1  4     +     1  6     +     1  68       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{3}}+{\tfrac {1}{4}}+{\tfrac {1}{6}}+{\tfrac {1}{68}}}   .
Complex and compound fractions  Not to be confused with Complex numbers .
In a complex fraction , either the numerator, or the denominator, or both, is a fraction or a mixed number,   corresponding to division of fractions.
For example,         1   /   2    1   /   3        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1/2}{1/3}}}   and       (    12     3  4       )      /    26    {\displaystyle {\bigl (}12{\tfrac {3}{4}}{\bigr )}{\big /}26}   are complex fractions.
To interpret nested fractions written "stacked" with a horizontal fraction bars, treat shorter bars as nested inside longer bars.
Complex fractions can be simplified using multiplication by the reciprocal, as described below at § Division .
For example:                  1  2          1  3         =    1  2    ÷    1  3    =    1  2    ×    3  1    =    3  2    ,           3  2        5    =    3  2    ÷  5  =    3  2    ×    1  5    =    3  10    ,         12     3  4      26       =     12  ×  4  +  3   4    ÷  26  =     12  ×  4  +  3   4    ×    1  26    =    51  104    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\frac {\;\!
{\tfrac {1}{2}}\;\!
}{\tfrac {1}{3}}}&={\frac {1}{2}}\div {\frac {1}{3}}={\frac {1}{2}}\times {\frac {3}{1}}={\frac {3}{2}},\qquad {\frac {\;\!
{\tfrac {3}{2}}\;\!
}{5}}={\frac {3}{2}}\div 5={\frac {3}{2}}\times {\frac {1}{5}}={\frac {3}{10}},\\{\frac {12{\tfrac {3}{4}}}{26}}&={\frac {12\times 4+3}{4}}\div 26={\frac {12\times 4+3}{4}}\times {\frac {1}{26}}={\frac {51}{104}}.\end{aligned}}}    A complex fraction should never be written without an obvious marker showing which fraction is nested inside the other, as such expressions are ambiguous.
For example, the expression     5   /   10   /   20    {\displaystyle 5/10/20}   could be plausibly interpreted as either        5  10       /    20  =     1  40       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{10}}{\big /}20={\tfrac {1}{40}}}   or as     5    /       10  20     =  10.
{\displaystyle 5{\big /}{\tfrac {10}{20}}=10.}
The meaning can be made explicit by writing the fractions using distinct separators or by adding explicit parentheses, in this instance     (  5   /   10  )    /    20    {\displaystyle (5/10){\big /}20}   or     5    /    (  10   /   20  )  .
{\displaystyle 5{\big /}(10/20).}
A compound fraction is a fraction of a fraction, or any number of fractions connected with the word of ,   corresponding to multiplication of fractions.
To reduce a compound fraction to a simple fraction, just carry out the multiplication (see § Multiplication ).
For example,        3  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}}   of        5  7       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{7}}}   is a compound fraction, corresponding to        3  4     ×     5  7     =     15  28       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}\times {\tfrac {5}{7}}={\tfrac {15}{28}}}   .
The terms compound fraction and complex fraction are closely related and sometimes one is used as a synonym for the other.
(For example, the compound fraction        3  4     ×     5  7       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}\times {\tfrac {5}{7}}}   is equivalent to the complex fraction         3   /   4    7   /   5        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3/4}{7/5}}}   .)
Nevertheless, "complex fraction" and "compound fraction" may both be considered outdated  and now used in no well-defined manner, partly even taken synonymously for each other  or for mixed numerals.
They have lost their meaning as technical terms and the attributes "complex" and "compound" tend to be used in their every day meaning of "consisting of parts".
Arithmetic with fractions  Like whole numbers, fractions obey the commutative , associative , and distributive laws, and the rule against division by zero .
Mixed-number arithmetic can be performed either by converting each mixed number to an improper fraction, or by treating each as a sum of integer and fractional parts.
Equivalent fractions  Multiplying the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same (non-zero) number results in a fraction that is equivalent to the original fraction.
This is true because for any non-zero number     n    {\displaystyle n}   , the fraction        n  n       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {n}{n}}}   equals 1.
Therefore, multiplying by        n  n       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {n}{n}}}   is the same as multiplying by one, and any number multiplied by one has the same value as the original number.
By way of an example, start with the fraction        1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}   .
When the numerator and denominator are both multiplied by 2, the result is 2 / 4 , which has the same value (0.5) as 1 / 2 .
To picture this visually, imagine cutting a cake into four pieces; two of the pieces together ( 2 / 4 ) make up half the cake ( 1 / 2 ).
Simplifying (reducing) fractions  Dividing the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same non-zero number yields an equivalent fraction: if the numerator and the denominator of a fraction are both divisible by a number (called a factor) greater than 1, then the fraction can be reduced to an equivalent fraction with a smaller numerator and a smaller denominator.
For example, if both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   are divisible by     c    {\displaystyle c}   , then they can be written as     a  =  c  d    {\displaystyle a=cd}   ,     b  =  c  e    {\displaystyle b=ce}   , and the fraction becomes cd / ce , which can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by c to give the reduced fraction d / e .
If one takes for c the greatest common divisor of the numerator and the denominator, one gets the equivalent fraction whose numerator and denominator have the lowest absolute values .
One says that the fraction has been reduced to its lowest terms .
If the numerator and the denominator do not share any factor greater than 1, the fraction is already reduced to its lowest terms, and it is said to be irreducible , reduced , or in simplest terms .
For example,        3  9       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{9}}}   is not in lowest terms because both 3 and 9 can be exactly divided by 3.
In contrast,        3  8       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{8}}}    is in lowest terms—the only positive integer that goes into both 3 and 8 evenly is 1.
Using these rules, we can show that 5 / 10 = 1 / 2 = 10 / 20 = 50 / 100 , for example.
As another example, since the greatest common divisor of 63 and 462 is 21, the fraction 63 / 462 can be reduced to lowest terms by dividing the numerator and denominator by 21:         63  462     =      63   ÷   21    462   ÷   21      =     3  22       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {63}{462}}={\tfrac {63\,\div \,21}{462\,\div \,21}}={\tfrac {3}{22}}}    The Euclidean algorithm gives a method for finding the greatest common divisor of any two integers.
Comparing fractions  Comparing fractions with the same positive denominator yields the same result as comparing the numerators:         3  4     >     2  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}>{\tfrac {2}{4}}}   because 3 > 2 , and the equal denominators     4    {\displaystyle 4}   are positive.
If the equal denominators are negative, then the opposite result of comparing the numerators holds for the fractions:         3   −  4      <     2   −  4       because      a   −  b      =      −  a   b      and   −  3  <  −  2.
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{-4}}<{\tfrac {2}{-4}}{\text{ because }}{\tfrac {a}{-b}}={\tfrac {-a}{b}}{\text{ and }}-3<-2.}
If two positive fractions have the same numerator, then the fraction with the smaller denominator is the larger number.
When a whole is divided into equal pieces, if fewer equal pieces are needed to make up the whole, then each piece must be larger.
When two positive fractions have the same numerator, they represent the same number of parts, but in the fraction with the smaller denominator, the parts are larger.
One way to compare fractions with different numerators and denominators is to find a common denominator.
To compare        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   and        c  d       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {c}{d}}}   , these are converted to         a  ⋅  d    b  ⋅  d        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a\cdot d}{b\cdot d}}}   and         b  ⋅  c    b  ⋅  d        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {b\cdot c}{b\cdot d}}}   (where the dot signifies multiplication and is an alternative symbol to ×).
Then bd is a common denominator and the numerators ad and bc can be compared.
It is not necessary to determine the value of the common denominator to compare fractions – one can just compare ad and bc , without evaluating bd , e.g., comparing        2  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}}   ?
1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}   gives        4  6     >     3  6       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {4}{6}}>{\tfrac {3}{6}}}   .
For the more laborious question        5  18       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{18}}}   ?
4  17     ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {4}{17}},}   multiply top and bottom of each fraction by the denominator of the other fraction, to get a common denominator, yielding         5  ×  17    18  ×  17        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5\times 17}{18\times 17}}}   ?
18  ×  4    18  ×  17        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {18\times 4}{18\times 17}}}   .
It is not necessary to calculate     18  ×  17    {\displaystyle 18\times 17}   – only the numerators need to be compared.
Since 5×17 (= 85) is greater than 4×18 (= 72), the result of comparing is        5  18     >     4  17       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{18}}>{\tfrac {4}{17}}}   .
Because every negative number, including negative fractions, is less than zero, and every positive number, including positive fractions, is greater than zero, it follows that any negative fraction is less than any positive fraction.
This allows, together with the above rules, to compare all possible fractions.
Addition  The first rule of addition is that only like quantities can be added; for example, various quantities of quarters.
Unlike quantities, such as adding thirds to quarters, must first be converted to like quantities as described below: Imagine a pocket containing two quarters, and another pocket containing three quarters; in total, there are five quarters.
Since four quarters is equivalent to one (dollar), this can be represented as follows:         2  4     +     3  4     =     5  4     =  1     1  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{4}}+{\tfrac {3}{4}}={\tfrac {5}{4}}=1{\tfrac {1}{4}}}   .
If        1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}   of a cake is to be added to        1  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{4}}}   of a cake, the pieces need to be converted into comparable quantities, such as cake-eighths or cake-quarters.
Adding unlike quantities  To add fractions containing unlike quantities (e.g.
quarters and thirds), it is necessary to convert all amounts to like quantities.
It is easy to work out the chosen type of fraction to convert to; simply multiply together the two denominators (bottom number) of each fraction.
In case of an integer number apply the invisible denominator 1.
For adding quarters to thirds, both types of fraction are converted to twelfths, thus:        1  4      +    1  3    =     1  ×  3    4  ×  3       +     1  ×  4    3  ×  4     =    3  12      +    4  12    =    7  12    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{4}}\ +{\frac {1}{3}}={\frac {1\times 3}{4\times 3}}\ +{\frac {1\times 4}{3\times 4}}={\frac {3}{12}}\ +{\frac {4}{12}}={\frac {7}{12}}.}
Consider adding the following two quantities:        3  5    +    2  3      {\displaystyle {\frac {3}{5}}+{\frac {2}{3}}}    First, convert        3  5       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{5}}}   into fifteenths by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by three:        3  5     ×     3  3     =     9  15       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{5}}\times {\tfrac {3}{3}}={\tfrac {9}{15}}}   .
Since 3 / 3 equals 1, multiplication by 3 / 3 does not change the value of the fraction.
Second, convert 2 / 3 into fifteenths by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by five:        2  3     ×     5  5     =     10  15       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}\times {\tfrac {5}{5}}={\tfrac {10}{15}}}   .
Now it can be seen that:        3  5    +    2  3      {\displaystyle {\frac {3}{5}}+{\frac {2}{3}}}    is equivalent to:        9  15    +    10  15    =    19  15    =  1    4  15      {\displaystyle {\frac {9}{15}}+{\frac {10}{15}}={\frac {19}{15}}=1{\frac {4}{15}}}    This method can be expressed algebraically:        a  b    +    c  d    =     a  d  +  c  b    b  d       {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}+{\frac {c}{d}}={\frac {ad+cb}{bd}}}    This algebraic method always works, thereby guaranteeing that the sum of simple fractions is always again a simple fraction.
However, if the single denominators contain a common factor, a smaller denominator than the product of these can be used.
For example, when adding        3  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}}   and        5  6       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {5}{6}}}   the single denominators have a common factor 2, and therefore, instead of the denominator 24 (4 × 6), the halved denominator 12 may be used, not only reducing the denominator in the result, but also the factors in the numerator.
3  4    +    5  6       =     3  ⋅  6    4  ⋅  6     +     4  ⋅  5    4  ⋅  6     =    18  24    +    20  24      =    19  12          =     3  ⋅  3    4  ⋅  3     +     2  ⋅  5    2  ⋅  6     =    9  12    +    10  12      =    19  12          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\frac {3}{4}}+{\frac {5}{6}}&={\frac {3\cdot 6}{4\cdot 6}}+{\frac {4\cdot 5}{4\cdot 6}}={\frac {18}{24}}+{\frac {20}{24}}&={\frac {19}{12}}\\&={\frac {3\cdot 3}{4\cdot 3}}+{\frac {2\cdot 5}{2\cdot 6}}={\frac {9}{12}}+{\frac {10}{12}}&={\frac {19}{12}}\end{aligned}}}    The smallest possible denominator is given by the least common multiple of the single denominators, which results from dividing the rote multiple by all common factors of the single denominators.
This is called the least common denominator.
Subtraction  The process for subtracting fractions is, in essence, the same as that of adding them: find a common denominator, and change each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the chosen common denominator.
The resulting fraction will have that denominator, and its numerator will be the result of subtracting the numerators of the original fractions.
For instance,         2  3     −     1  2     =     4  6     −     3  6     =     1  6       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}-{\tfrac {1}{2}}={\tfrac {4}{6}}-{\tfrac {3}{6}}={\tfrac {1}{6}}}    To subtract a mixed number, an extra one can be borrowed from the minuend, for instance      4  −  2     3  4     =  (  4  −  2  −  1  )  +    (    1  −     3  4       )    =  1     1  4     .
{\displaystyle 4-2{\tfrac {3}{4}}=(4-2-1)+{\bigl (}1-{\tfrac {3}{4}}{\bigr )}=1{\tfrac {1}{4}}.}
Multiplication  Multiplying a fraction by another fraction  To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.
Thus:        2  3    ×    3  4    =    6  12      {\displaystyle {\frac {2}{3}}\times {\frac {3}{4}}={\frac {6}{12}}}    To explain the process, consider one third of one quarter.
Using the example of a cake, if three small slices of equal size make up a quarter, and four quarters make up a whole, twelve of these small, equal slices make up a whole.
Therefore, a third of a quarter is a twelfth.
Now consider the numerators.
The first fraction, two thirds, is twice as large as one third.
Since one third of a quarter is one twelfth, two thirds of a quarter is two twelfth.
The second fraction, three quarters, is three times as large as one quarter, so two thirds of three quarters is three times as large as two thirds of one quarter.
Thus two thirds times three quarters is six twelfths.
A short cut for multiplying fractions is called "cancellation".
Effectively the answer is reduced to lowest terms during multiplication.
For example:        2  3    ×    3  4    =       2       1       3       1      ×       3       1       4       2      =    1  1    ×    1  2    =    1  2      {\displaystyle {\frac {2}{3}}\times {\frac {3}{4}}={\frac {{\cancel {2}}^{~1}}{{\cancel {3}}^{~1}}}\times {\frac {{\cancel {3}}^{~1}}{{\cancel {4}}^{~2}}}={\frac {1}{1}}\times {\frac {1}{2}}={\frac {1}{2}}}    A two is a common factor in both the numerator of the left fraction and the denominator of the right and is divided out of both.
Three is a common factor of the left denominator and right numerator and is divided out of both.
Multiplying a fraction by a whole number  Since a whole number can be rewritten as itself divided by 1, normal fraction multiplication rules can still apply.
6  ×     3  4     =     6  1     ×     3  4     =     18  4       {\displaystyle 6\times {\tfrac {3}{4}}={\tfrac {6}{1}}\times {\tfrac {3}{4}}={\tfrac {18}{4}}}    This method works because the fraction 6/1 means six equal parts, each one of which is a whole.
Multiplying mixed numbers  The product of mixed numbers can be computed by converting each to an improper fraction.
For example:      3  ×  2    3  4    =    3  1    ×     2  ×  4  +  3   4    =    33  4    =  8    1  4      {\displaystyle 3\times 2{\frac {3}{4}}={\frac {3}{1}}\times {\frac {2\times 4+3}{4}}={\frac {33}{4}}=8{\frac {1}{4}}}    Alternately, mixed numbers can be treated as sums, and multiplied as binomials .
In this example,      3  ×  2    3  4    =  3  ×  2  +  3  ×    3  4    =  6  +    9  4    =  8    1  4    .
{\displaystyle 3\times 2{\frac {3}{4}}=3\times 2+3\times {\frac {3}{4}}=6+{\frac {9}{4}}=8{\frac {1}{4}}.}
Division  To divide a fraction by a whole number, you may either divide the numerator by the number, if it goes evenly into the numerator, or multiply the denominator by the number.
For example,        10  3     ÷  5    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {10}{3}}\div 5}   equals        2  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}}   and also equals        10   3  ⋅  5      =     10  15       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {10}{3\cdot 5}}={\tfrac {10}{15}}}   , which reduces to        2  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}}   .
To divide a number by a fraction, multiply that number by the reciprocal of that fraction.
Thus,        1  2     ÷     3  4     =     1  2     ×     4  3     =      1  ⋅  4    2  ⋅  3      =     2  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}\div {\tfrac {3}{4}}={\tfrac {1}{2}}\times {\tfrac {4}{3}}={\tfrac {1\cdot 4}{2\cdot 3}}={\tfrac {2}{3}}}   .
Converting between decimals and fractions  To change a common fraction to a decimal, do a long division of the decimal representations of the numerator by the denominator (this is idiomatically also phrased as "divide the denominator into the numerator"), and round the answer to the desired accuracy.
For example, to change 1 / 4 to a decimal, divide 1.00 by 4 (" 4 into 1.00 "), to obtain 0.25 .
To change 1 / 3 to a decimal, divide 1.000...
by 3 (" 3 into 1.000...
"), and stop when the desired accuracy is obtained, e.g., at 4 decimals with 0.3333 .
The fraction 1 / 4 can be written exactly with two decimal digits, while the fraction 1 / 3 cannot be written exactly as a decimal with a finite number of digits.
To change a decimal to a fraction, write in the denominator a 1 followed by as many zeroes as there are digits to the right of the decimal point, and write in the numerator all the digits of the original decimal, just omitting the decimal point.
Thus     12.3456  =     123456  10000     .
{\displaystyle 12.3456={\tfrac {123456}{10000}}.}
Converting repeating decimals to fractions  Further information: Decimal representation § Conversion to fraction  See also: Repeating decimal  Decimal numbers, while arguably more useful to work with when performing calculations, sometimes lack the precision that common fractions have.
Sometimes an infinite repeating decimal is required to reach the same precision.
Thus, it is often useful to convert repeating decimals into fractions.
A conventional way to indicate a repeating decimal is to place a bar (known as a vinculum ) over the digits that repeat, for example 0.
789 = 0.789789789...
For repeating patterns that begin immediately after the decimal point, the result of the conversion is the fraction with the pattern as a numerator, and the same number of nines as a denominator.
For example:  0.
5 = 5/9  0.
62 = 62/99  0.
264 = 264/999  0.
6291 = 6291/9999  If leading zeros precede the pattern, the nines are suffixed by the same number of trailing zeros :  0.0 5 = 5/90  0.000 392 = 392/999000  0.00 12 = 12/9900  If a non-repeating set of decimals precede the pattern (such as 0.1523 987 ), one may write the number as the sum of the non-repeating and repeating parts, respectively:  0.1523 + 0.0000 987  Then, convert both parts to fractions, and add them using the methods described above:  1523 / 10000 + 987 / 9990000 = 1522464 / 9990000  Alternatively, algebra can be used, such as below:  Let x = the repeating decimal: x = 0.1523 987  Multiply both sides by the power of 10 just great enough (in this case 10 4 ) to move the decimal point just before the repeating part of the decimal number: 10,000 x = 1,523.
987  Multiply both sides by the power of 10 (in this case 10 3 ) that is the same as the number of places that repeat: 10,000,000 x = 1,523,987.
987  Subtract the two equations from each other (if a = b and c = d , then a − c = b − d ): 10,000,000 x − 10,000 x = 1,523,987.
987 − 1,523.
987  Continue the subtraction operation to clear the repeating decimal: 9,990,000 x = 1,523,987 − 1,523  9,990,000 x = 1,522,464  Divide both sides by 9,990,000 to represent x as a fraction x = 1522464 / 9990000  Fractions in abstract mathematics  In addition to being of great practical importance, fractions are also studied by mathematicians, who check that the rules for fractions given above are consistent and reliable .
Mathematicians define a fraction as an ordered pair     (  a  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)}   of integers      a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b  ≠  0  ,    {\displaystyle b\neq 0,}   for which the operations addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division are defined as follows:        (  a  ,  b  )  +  (  c  ,  d  )  =  (  a  d  +  b  c  ,  b  d  )     {\displaystyle (a,b)+(c,d)=(ad+bc,bd)\,}        (  a  ,  b  )  −  (  c  ,  d  )  =  (  a  d  −  b  c  ,  b  d  )     {\displaystyle (a,b)-(c,d)=(ad-bc,bd)\,}        (  a  ,  b  )  ⋅  (  c  ,  d  )  =  (  a  c  ,  b  d  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)\cdot (c,d)=(ac,bd)}        (  a  ,  b  )  ÷  (  c  ,  d  )  =  (  a  d  ,  b  c  )   (   with, additionally,   c  ≠  0  )    {\displaystyle (a,b)\div (c,d)=(ad,bc)\quad ({\text{with, additionally, }}c\neq 0)}    These definitions agree in every case with the definitions given above; only the notation is different.
Alternatively, instead of defining subtraction and division as operations, the "inverse" fractions with respect to addition and multiplication might be defined as:          −  (  a  ,  b  )     =  (  −  a  ,  b  )      additive inverse fractions,           with   (  0  ,  b  )   as additive unities, and       (  a  ,  b   )   −  1       =  (  b  ,  a  )      multiplicative inverse fractions, for   a  ≠  0  ,          with   (  b  ,  b  )   as multiplicative unities   .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}-(a,b)&=(-a,b)&&{\text{additive inverse fractions,}}\\&&&{\text{with }}(0,b){\text{ as additive unities, and}}\\(a,b)^{-1}&=(b,a)&&{\text{multiplicative inverse fractions, for }}a\neq 0,\\&&&{\text{with }}(b,b){\text{ as multiplicative unities}}.\end{aligned}}}    Furthermore, the relation , specified as      (  a  ,  b  )  ∼  (  c  ,  d  )    ⟺    a  d  =  b  c  ,    {\displaystyle (a,b)\sim (c,d)\quad \iff \quad ad=bc,}    is an equivalence relation of fractions.
Each fraction from one equivalence class may be considered as a representative for the whole class, and each whole class may be considered as one abstract fraction.
This equivalence is preserved by the above defined operations, i.e., the results of operating on fractions are independent of the selection of representatives from their equivalence class.
Formally, for addition of fractions      (  a  ,  b  )  ∼  (   a  ′   ,   b  ′   )     {\displaystyle (a,b)\sim (a',b')\quad }   and      (  c  ,  d  )  ∼  (   c  ′   ,   d  ′   )     {\displaystyle \quad (c,d)\sim (c',d')\quad }   imply     (  (  a  ,  b  )  +  (  c  ,  d  )  )  ∼  (  (   a  ′   ,   b  ′   )  +  (   c  ′   ,   d  ′   )  )    {\displaystyle ((a,b)+(c,d))\sim ((a',b')+(c',d'))}    and similarly for the other operations.
In the case of fractions of integers, the fractions a / b with a and b  coprime and b > 0 are often taken as uniquely determined representatives for their equivalent fractions, which are considered to be the same rational number.
This way the fractions of integers make up the field of the rational numbers.
More generally, a and b may be elements of any integral domain  R , in which case a fraction is an element of the field of fractions of R .
For example, polynomials in one indeterminate, with coefficients from some integral domain D , are themselves an integral domain, call it P .
So for a and b elements of P , the generated field of fractions is the field of rational fractions (also known as the field of rational functions ).
Algebraic fractions  Main article: Algebraic fraction  An algebraic fraction is the indicated quotient of two algebraic expressions .
As with fractions of integers, the denominator of an algebraic fraction cannot be zero.
Two examples of algebraic fractions are        3  x     x   2    +  2  x  −  3       {\displaystyle {\frac {3x}{x^{2}+2x-3}}}   and        x  +  2     x   2    −  3       {\displaystyle {\frac {\sqrt {x+2}}{x^{2}-3}}}   .
Algebraic fractions are subject to the same field properties as arithmetic fractions.
If the numerator and the denominator are polynomials , as in        3  x     x   2    +  2  x  −  3       {\displaystyle {\frac {3x}{x^{2}+2x-3}}}   , the algebraic fraction is called a rational fraction (or rational expression ).
An irrational fraction is one that is not rational, as, for example, one that contains the variable under a fractional exponent or root, as in        x  +  2     x   2    −  3       {\displaystyle {\frac {\sqrt {x+2}}{x^{2}-3}}}   .
The terminology used to describe algebraic fractions is similar to that used for ordinary fractions.
For example, an algebraic fraction is in lowest terms if the only factors common to the numerator and the denominator are 1 and −1.
An algebraic fraction whose numerator or denominator, or both, contain a fraction, such as        1  +     1  x       1  −     1  x          {\displaystyle {\frac {1+{\tfrac {1}{x}}}{1-{\tfrac {1}{x}}}}}   , is called a complex fraction .
The field of rational numbers is the field of fractions of the integers, while the integers themselves are not a field but rather an integral domain .
Similarly, the rational fractions with coefficients in a field form the field of fractions of polynomials with coefficient in that field.
Considering the rational fractions with real coefficients, radical expressions representing numbers, such as        2     /   2     {\displaystyle \textstyle {\sqrt {2}}/2}   , are also rational fractions, as are a transcendental numbers such as     π   /   2  ,    {\textstyle \pi /2,}   since all of       2    ,  π  ,    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}},\pi ,}   and     2    {\displaystyle 2}   are real numbers , and thus considered as coefficients.
These same numbers, however, are not rational fractions with integer coefficients.
The term partial fraction is used when decomposing rational fractions into sums of simpler fractions.
For example, the rational fraction        2  x     x   2    −  1       {\displaystyle {\frac {2x}{x^{2}-1}}}   can be decomposed as the sum of two fractions:       1   x  +  1     +    1   x  −  1       {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{x+1}}+{\frac {1}{x-1}}}   .
This is useful for the computation of antiderivatives of rational functions (see partial fraction decomposition for more).
Radical expressions  Main articles: Nth root and Rationalization (mathematics)  A fraction may also contain radicals in the numerator or the denominator.
If the denominator contains radicals, it can be helpful to rationalize it (compare Simplified form of a radical expression ), especially if further operations, such as adding or comparing that fraction to another, are to be carried out.
It is also more convenient if division is to be done manually.
When the denominator is a monomial square root, it can be rationalized by multiplying both the top and the bottom of the fraction by the denominator:        3   7     =    3   7     ⋅     7    7     =     3    7     7      {\displaystyle {\frac {3}{\sqrt {7}}}={\frac {3}{\sqrt {7}}}\cdot {\frac {\sqrt {7}}{\sqrt {7}}}={\frac {3{\sqrt {7}}}{7}}}    The process of rationalization of binomial denominators involves multiplying the top and the bottom of a fraction by the conjugate of the denominator so that the denominator becomes a rational number.
For example:        3   3  −  2    5       =    3   3  −  2    5       ⋅     3  +  2    5      3  +  2    5       =     3  (  3  +  2    5    )      3    2    −  (  2    5     )   2       =     3  (  3  +  2    5    )    9  −  20     =  −     9  +  6    5     11      {\displaystyle {\frac {3}{3-2{\sqrt {5}}}}={\frac {3}{3-2{\sqrt {5}}}}\cdot {\frac {3+2{\sqrt {5}}}{3+2{\sqrt {5}}}}={\frac {3(3+2{\sqrt {5}})}{{3}^{2}-(2{\sqrt {5}})^{2}}}={\frac {3(3+2{\sqrt {5}})}{9-20}}=-{\frac {9+6{\sqrt {5}}}{11}}}          3   3  +  2    5       =    3   3  +  2    5       ⋅     3  −  2    5      3  −  2    5       =     3  (  3  −  2    5    )      3    2    −  (  2    5     )   2       =     3  (  3  −  2    5    )    9  −  20     =  −     9  −  6    5     11      {\displaystyle {\frac {3}{3+2{\sqrt {5}}}}={\frac {3}{3+2{\sqrt {5}}}}\cdot {\frac {3-2{\sqrt {5}}}{3-2{\sqrt {5}}}}={\frac {3(3-2{\sqrt {5}})}{{3}^{2}-(2{\sqrt {5}})^{2}}}={\frac {3(3-2{\sqrt {5}})}{9-20}}=-{\frac {9-6{\sqrt {5}}}{11}}}    Even if this process results in the numerator being irrational, like in the examples above, the process may still facilitate subsequent manipulations by reducing the number of irrationals one has to work with in the denominator.
Typographical variations  See also: Slash § Encoding  In computer displays and typography , simple fractions are sometimes printed as a single character, e.g.
½ ( one half ).
See the article on Number Forms for information on doing this in Unicode .
Scientific publishing distinguishes four ways to set fractions, together with guidelines on use:    Special fractions : fractions that are presented as a single character with a slanted bar, with roughly the same height and width as other characters in the text.
Generally used for simple fractions, such as: ½, ⅓, ⅔, ¼, and ¾.
Since the numerals are smaller, legibility can be an issue, especially for small-sized fonts.
These are not used in modern mathematical notation, but in other contexts.
Case fractions : similar to special fractions, these are rendered as a single typographical character, but with a horizontal bar, thus making them upright .
An example would be 1 / 2 , but rendered with the same height as other characters.
Some sources include all rendering of fractions as case fractions if they take only one typographical space, regardless of the direction of the bar.
Shilling or solidus fractions : 1/2, so called because this notation was used for pre-decimal British currency ( £sd ), as in "2/6" for a half crown , meaning two shillings and six pence.
While the notation "two shillings and six pence" did not represent a fraction, the forward slash is now used in fractions, especially for fractions inline with prose (rather than displayed), to avoid uneven lines.
It is also used for fractions within fractions ( complex fractions ) or within exponents to increase legibility.
Fractions written this way, also known as piece fractions ,  are written all on one typographical line, but take 3 or more typographical spaces.
Built-up fractions :       1  2      {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{2}}}   .
This notation uses two or more lines of ordinary text and results in a variation in spacing between lines when included within other text.
While large and legible, these can be disruptive, particularly for simple fractions or within complex fractions.
History  This History section needs additional citations for verification .
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this History section.
Find sources:  "Fraction" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  The earliest fractions were reciprocals of integers : ancient symbols representing one part of two, one part of three, one part of four, and so on.
The Egyptians used Egyptian fractions  c.
1000 BC.
About 4000 years ago, Egyptians divided with fractions using slightly different methods.
They used least common multiples with unit fractions .
Their methods gave the same answer as modern methods.
The Egyptians also had a different notation for dyadic fractions , used for certain systems of weights and measures.
The Greeks used unit fractions and (later) continued fractions .
Followers of the Greek  philosopher  Pythagoras ( c.
530 BC) discovered that the square root of two  cannot be expressed as a fraction of integers .
(This is commonly though probably erroneously ascribed to Hippasus of Metapontum , who is said to have been executed for revealing this fact.)
In 150 BC  Jain mathematicians in India wrote the " Sthananga Sutra ", which contains work on the theory of numbers, arithmetical operations, and operations with fractions.
A modern expression of fractions known as bhinnarasi seems to have originated in India in the work of Aryabhatta ( c.
AD 500 ),   Brahmagupta ( c.
628 ), and Bhaskara ( c.
1150 ).
Their works form fractions by placing the numerators ( Sanskrit : amsa ) over the denominators ( cheda ), but without a bar between them.
In Sanskrit literature , fractions were always expressed as an addition to or subtraction from an integer.
The integer was written on one line and the fraction in its two parts on the next line.
If the fraction was marked by a small circle ⟨०⟩ or cross ⟨+⟩ , it is subtracted from the integer; if no such sign appears, it is understood to be added.
For example, Bhaskara I writes:    ६  १  २  १  १  १ ०  ४  ५  ९  which is the equivalent of  6  1  2  1  1  −1  4  5  9  and would be written in modern notation as 6 1 / 4 , 1 1 / 5 , and 2 − 1 / 9 (i.e., 1 8 / 9 ).
The horizontal fraction bar is first attested in the work of Al-Hassār ( fl.
1200 ),  a Muslim mathematician from Fez , Morocco , who specialized in Islamic inheritance jurisprudence .
In his discussion he writes: "for example, if you are told to write three-fifths and a third of a fifth, write thus,        3   1    5   3       {\displaystyle {\frac {3\quad 1}{5\quad 3}}}   ".
The same fractional notation—with the fraction given before the integer  —appears soon after in the work of Leonardo Fibonacci in the 13th century.
In discussing the origins of decimal fractions , Dirk Jan Struik states:     The introduction of decimal fractions as a common computational practice can be dated back to the Flemish pamphlet De Thiende , published at Leyden in 1585, together with a French translation, La Disme , by the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin (1548–1620), then settled in the Northern Netherlands .
It is true that decimal fractions were used by the Chinese many centuries before Stevin and that the Persian astronomer Al-Kāshī used both decimal and sexagesimal fractions with great ease in his Key to arithmetic ( Samarkand , early fifteenth century).
While the Persian mathematician Jamshīd al-Kāshī claimed to have discovered decimal fractions himself in the 15th century, J.
Lennart Berggren notes that he was mistaken, as decimal fractions were first used five centuries before him by the Baghdadi mathematician Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi as early as the 10th century.
In formal education  Pedagogical tools  In primary schools , fractions have been demonstrated through Cuisenaire rods , Fraction Bars, fraction strips, fraction circles, paper (for folding or cutting), pattern blocks , pie-shaped pieces, plastic rectangles, grid paper, dot paper , geoboards , counters and computer software.
Documents for teachers  Several states in the United States have adopted learning trajectories from the Common Core State Standards Initiative 's guidelines for mathematics education.
Aside from sequencing the learning of fractions and operations with fractions, the document provides the following definition of a fraction: "A number expressible in the form     a    {\displaystyle a}   /     b    {\displaystyle b}   where     a    {\displaystyle a}   is a whole number and     b    {\displaystyle b}   is a positive whole number.
(The word fraction in these standards always refers to a non-negative number.)"
The document itself also refers to negative fractions.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Method of proof in mathematics  In mathematics , a constructive proof is a method of proof that demonstrates the existence of a mathematical object by creating or providing a method for creating the object.
This is in contrast to a non-constructive proof (also known as an existence proof or pure existence theorem ), which proves the existence of a particular kind of object without providing an example.
For avoiding confusion with the stronger concept that follows, such a constructive proof is sometimes called an effective proof .
A constructive proof may also refer to the stronger concept of a proof that is valid in constructive mathematics .
Constructivism is a mathematical philosophy that rejects all proof methods that involve the existence of objects that are not explicitly built.
This excludes, in particular, the use of the law of the excluded middle , the axiom of infinity , and the axiom of choice , and induces a different meaning for some terminology (for example, the term "or" has a stronger meaning in constructive mathematics than in classical).
Some non-constructive proofs show that if a certain proposition is false, a contradiction ensues; consequently the proposition must be true ( proof by contradiction ).
However, the principle of explosion ( ex falso quodlibet ) has been accepted in some varieties of constructive mathematics, including intuitionism .
Constructive proofs can be seen as defining certified mathematical algorithms : this idea is explored in the Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov interpretation of constructive logic , the Curry–Howard correspondence between proofs and programs, and such logical systems as Per Martin-Löf 's intuitionistic type theory , and Thierry Coquand and Gérard Huet 's calculus of constructions .
A historical example   Until the end of 19th century, all mathematical proofs were essentially constructive.
The first non-constructive constructions appeared with Georg Cantor ’s theory of infinite sets , and the formal definition of real numbers .
The first use of non-constructive proofs for solving previously considered problems seems to be Hilbert's Nullstellensatz and Hilbert's basis theorem .
From a philosophical point of view, the former is especially interesting, as implying the existence of a well specified object.
The Nullstellensatz may be stated as follows: If      f   1    ,  …  ,   f   k      {\displaystyle f_{1},\ldots ,f_{k}}   are polynomials in n indeterminates with complex coefficients, which have no common complex zeros , then there are polynomials      g   1    ,  …  ,   g   k      {\displaystyle g_{1},\ldots ,g_{k}}   such that       f   1     g   1    +  …  +   f   k     g   k    =  1.
Such a non-constructive existence theorem was such a surprise for mathematicians of that time that one of them, Paul Gordan , wrote: "this is not mathematics, it is theology ".
Twenty five years later, Grete Hermann provided an algorithm for computing      g   1    ,  …  ,   g   k    ,    {\displaystyle g_{1},\ldots ,g_{k},}   which is not a constructive proof in the strong sense, as she used Hilbert's result.
She proved that, if      g   1    ,  …  ,   g   k      {\displaystyle g_{1},\ldots ,g_{k}}   exist, they can be found with degrees less than      2    2   n        {\displaystyle 2^{2^{n}}}   .
This provides an algorithm, as the problem is reduced to solving a system of linear equations , by considering as unknowns the finite number of coefficients of the      g   i    .
{\displaystyle g_{i}.}
Examples   Non-constructive proofs   First consider the theorem that there are an infinitude of prime numbers .
Euclid 's proof is constructive.
But a common way of simplifying Euclid's proof postulates that, contrary to the assertion in the theorem, there are only a finite number of them, in which case there is a largest one, denoted n .
Then consider the number n !
+ 1 (1 + the product of the first n numbers).
Either this number is prime, or all of its prime factors are greater than n .
Without establishing a specific prime number, this proves that one exists that is greater than n , contrary to the original postulate.
Now consider the theorem "there exist irrational numbers      a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   such that      a   b      {\displaystyle a^{b}}   is rational ."
This theorem can be proven by using both a constructive proof, and a non-constructive proof.
The following 1953 proof by Dov Jarden has been widely used as an example of a non-constructive proof since at least 1970:      CURIOSA  339.
A Simple Proof That a Power of an Irrational Number to an Irrational Exponent May Be Rational.
2      2       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   is either rational or irrational.
If it is rational, our statement is proved.
If it is irrational,     (     2      2      )    2     =  2    {\displaystyle ({\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}})^{\sqrt {2}}=2}   proves our statement.
Dov Jarden     Jerusalem   In a bit more detail:  Recall that       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}    is irrational , and 2 is rational.
Consider the number     q  =     2      2       {\displaystyle q={\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   .
Either it is rational or it is irrational.
If     q    {\displaystyle q}   is rational, then the theorem is true, with     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   both being       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   .
If     q    {\displaystyle q}   is irrational, then the theorem is true, with     a    {\displaystyle a}   being        2      2       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   being       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   , since        (     2      2     )     2     =     2     (    2    ⋅    2    )    =     2     2    =  2.
{\displaystyle \left({\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}\right)^{\sqrt {2}}={\sqrt {2}}^{({\sqrt {2}}\cdot {\sqrt {2}})}={\sqrt {2}}^{2}=2.}
At its core, this proof is non-constructive because it relies on the statement "Either q is rational or it is irrational"—an instance of the law of excluded middle , which is not valid within a constructive proof.
The non-constructive proof does not construct an example a and b ; it merely gives a number of possibilities (in this case, two mutually exclusive possibilities) and shows that one of them—but does not show which one—must yield the desired example.
As it turns out,        2      2       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}^{\sqrt {2}}}   is irrational because of the Gelfond–Schneider theorem , but this fact is irrelevant to the correctness of the non-constructive proof.
Constructive proofs   A constructive proof of the theorem that a power of an irrational number to an irrational exponent may be rational  gives an actual example, such as:      a  =    2     ,   b  =   log   2    ⁡  9   ,    a   b    =  3   .
{\displaystyle a={\sqrt {2}}\,,\quad b=\log _{2}9\,,\quad a^{b}=3\,.}
The square root of 2 is irrational, and 3 is rational.
log   2    ⁡  9    {\displaystyle \log _{2}9}   is also irrational: if it were equal to      m   n    {\displaystyle m \over n}   , then, by the properties of logarithms , 9 n would be equal to 2 m , but the former is odd, and the latter is even.
A more substantial example is the graph minor theorem .
A consequence of this theorem is that a graph can be drawn on the torus if, and only if, none of its minors belong to a certain finite set of " forbidden minors ".
However, the proof of the existence of this finite set is not constructive, and the forbidden minors are not actually specified.
They are still unknown.
Brouwerian counterexamples   In constructive mathematics , a statement may be disproved by giving a counterexample , as in classical mathematics.
However, it is also possible to give a Brouwerian counterexample to show that the statement is non-constructive.
This sort of counterexample shows that the statement implies some principle that is known to be non-constructive.
If it can be proved constructively that the statement implies some principle that is not constructively provable, then the statement itself cannot be constructively provable.
For example, a particular statement may be shown to imply the law of the excluded middle.
An example of a Brouwerian counterexample of this type is Diaconescu's theorem , which shows that the full axiom of choice is non-constructive in systems of constructive set theory , since the axiom of choice implies the law of excluded middle in such systems.
The field of constructive reverse mathematics develops this idea further by classifying various principles in terms of "how nonconstructive" they are, by showing they are equivalent to various fragments of the law of the excluded middle.
Brouwer also provided "weak" counterexamples.
Such counterexamples do not disprove a statement, however; they only show that, at present, no constructive proof of the statement is known.
One weak counterexample begins by taking some unsolved problem of mathematics, such as Goldbach's conjecture , which asks whether every even natural number larger than 4 is the sum of two primes.
Define a sequence a ( n ) of rational numbers as follows:        a  (  n  )  =    {     (  1   /   2   )   n        if every even natural number in the interval        is the sum of two primes    ,      (  1   /   2   )   k        if    k    is the least even natural number in the interval        which is not the sum of two primes            {\displaystyle a(n)={\begin{cases}(1/2)^{n}&{\mbox{if every even natural number in the interval }}{\mbox{ is the sum of two primes}},\\(1/2)^{k}&{\mbox{if }}k{\mbox{ is the least even natural number in the interval }}{\mbox{ which is not the sum of two primes}}\end{cases}}}    For each n , the value of a ( n ) can be determined by exhaustive search, and so a is a well defined sequence, constructively.
Moreover, because a is a Cauchy sequence with a fixed rate
of convergence, a converges to some real number α, according to the usual treatment of real numbers in constructive mathematics.
Several facts about the real number α can be proved constructively.
However, based on the different meaning of the words in constructive mathematics, if there is a constructive proof that "α = 0 or α ≠ 0" then this would mean that there is a constructive proof of Goldbach's conjecture (in the former case) or a constructive proof that Goldbach's conjecture is false (in the latter case).
Because no such proof is known, the quoted statement must also not have a known constructive proof.
However, it is entirely possible that Goldbach's conjecture may have a constructive proof (as we do not know at present whether it does), in which case the quoted statement would have a constructive proof as well, albeit one that is unknown at present.
The main practical use of weak counterexamples is to identify the "hardness" of a problem.
For example, the counterexample just shown shows that the quoted statement is "at least as hard to prove" as Goldbach's conjecture.
Weak counterexamples of this sort are often related to the limited principle of omniscience .
French mathematician and engineer (1809–1882)  "Liouville" redirects here.
For the lunar crater, see Liouville (crater) .
Joseph Liouville FRS  FRSE  FAS Born ( 1809-03-24 ) 24 March 1809 Saint-Omer , France Died 8 September 1882 (1882-09-08) (aged 73) Paris , France Nationality French Alma mater École Polytechnique Known for Sturm–Liouville theory Liouville's equation Liouville's theorem (complex analysis) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions École Centrale Paris École Polytechnique Doctoral advisor Siméon Poisson Louis Jacques Thénard Doctoral students Eugène Charles Catalan Nikolai Bugaev   Joseph Liouville  FRS  FRSE  FAS ( / ˌ l iː uː ˈ v ɪ l / ; French:   ; 24 March 1809 – 8 September 1882)   was a French mathematician and engineer.
Life and work   Title page of the first volume of Journal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées in 1836.
He was born in Saint-Omer in France on 24 March 1809.
His parents were Claude-Joseph Liouville (an army officer) and Thérèse Liouville (née Balland).
Liouville gained admission to the École Polytechnique in 1825 and graduated in 1827.
Just like Augustin-Louis Cauchy before him, Liouville studied engineering at École des Ponts et Chaussées after graduating from the Polytechnique, but opted instead for a career in mathematics.
After some years as an assistant at various institutions including the École Centrale Paris , he was appointed as professor at the École Polytechnique in 1838.
He obtained a chair in mathematics at the Collège de France in 1850 and a chair in mechanics at the Faculté des Sciences in 1857.
Besides his academic achievements, he was very talented in organisational matters.
Liouville founded the Journal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées which retains its high reputation up to today, in order to promote other mathematicians' work.
He was the first to read, and to recognize the importance of, the unpublished work of Évariste Galois which appeared in his journal in 1846.
Liouville was also involved in politics for some time, and he became a member of the Constituting Assembly in 1848.
However, after his defeat in the legislative elections in 1849, he turned away from politics.
Liouville worked in a number of different fields in mathematics, including number theory , complex analysis , differential geometry and topology , but also mathematical physics and even astronomy .
He is remembered particularly for Liouville's theorem .
In number theory, he was the first to prove the existence of transcendental numbers by a construction using continued fractions ( Liouville numbers ).
In mathematical physics, Liouville made two fundamental contributions: the Sturm–Liouville theory , which was joint work with Charles François Sturm , and is now a standard procedure to solve certain types of integral equations by developing into eigenfunctions, and the fact (also known as Liouville's theorem ) that time evolution is measure preserving for a Hamiltonian system.
In Hamiltonian dynamics, Liouville also introduced the notion of action-angle variables as a description of completely integrable systems .
The modern formulation of this is sometimes called the Liouville–Arnold theorem , and the underlying concept of integrability is referred to as Liouville integrability .
Additionally, Liouville developed the Riemann-Liouville integral to consider differentiation and integration of a fractional order .
In 1851, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences .
In 1853, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society .
The crater Liouville on the Moon is named after him.
So is the Liouville function , an important function in number theory.
In mathematics, a non-algebraic number  "U-number" redirects here.
For thermal conductivity, see R-value (insulation) § U-value .
In mathematics , a transcendental number is a real or complex number that is not algebraic – that is, not the root of a non-zero polynomial of finite degree with rational  coefficients .
The best-known transcendental numbers are π and e .
Though only a few classes of transcendental numbers are known – partly because it can be extremely difficult to show that a given number is transcendental  – transcendental numbers are not rare: indeed, almost all real and complex numbers are transcendental, since the algebraic numbers form a countable set , while the set of real numbers and the set of complex numbers are both uncountable sets , and therefore larger than any countable set.
All transcendental real numbers (also known as real transcendental numbers or transcendental irrational numbers ) are irrational numbers , since all rational numbers are algebraic.
The converse is not true: Not all irrational numbers are transcendental.
Hence, the set of real numbers consists of non-overlapping sets of rational, algebraic non-rational, and transcendental real numbers.
For example, the square root of 2 is an irrational number, but it is not a transcendental number as it is a root of the polynomial equation x 2 − 2 = 0 .
The golden ratio (denoted     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   or     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   ) is another irrational number that is not transcendental, as it is a root of the polynomial equation x 2 − x − 1 = 0 .
The quality of a number being transcendental is called transcendence .
History   The name "transcendental" comes from Latin  trānscendere 'to climb over or beyond, surmount',  and was first used for the mathematical concept in Leibniz's 1682 paper in which he proved that sin x is not an algebraic function of x .
Euler , in the 18th century, was probably the first person to define transcendental numbers in the modern sense.
Johann Heinrich Lambert conjectured that e and π were both transcendental numbers in his 1768 paper proving the number π is irrational , and proposed a tentative sketch proof that π is transcendental.
Joseph Liouville first proved the existence of transcendental numbers in 1844,  and in 1851 gave the first decimal examples such as the Liouville constant           L   b       =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞     10   −  n  !
=   10   −  1    +   10   −  2    +   10   −  6    +   10   −  24    +   10   −  120    +   10   −  720    +   10   −  5040    +   10   −  40320    +  …        =  0.
1      1    000    1    00000000000000000    1    00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000    …        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}L_{b}&=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }10^{-n!
}\\&=10^{-1}+10^{-2}+10^{-6}+10^{-24}+10^{-120}+10^{-720}+10^{-5040}+10^{-40320}+\ldots \\&=0.
{\textbf {1}}{\textbf {1}}000{\textbf {1}}00000000000000000{\textbf {1}}00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000\ \ldots \end{aligned}}}    in which the n th digit after the decimal point is 1 if n is equal to k !
( k  factorial ) for some k and 0 otherwise.
In other words, the n th digit of this number is 1 only if n is one of the numbers 1!
= 1, 2!
= 2, 3!
= 6, 4!
= 24 , etc.
Liouville showed that this number belongs to a class of transcendental numbers that can be more closely approximated by rational numbers than can any irrational algebraic number, and this class of numbers are called Liouville numbers , named in his honour.
Liouville showed that all Liouville numbers are transcendental.
The first number to be proven transcendental without having been specifically constructed for the purpose of proving transcendental numbers' existence was e , by Charles Hermite in 1873.
In 1874, Georg Cantor proved that the algebraic numbers are countable and the real numbers are uncountable.
He also gave a new method for constructing transcendental numbers.
Although this was already implied by his proof of the countability of the algebraic numbers, Cantor also published a construction that proves there are as many transcendental numbers as there are real numbers.
Cantor's work established the ubiquity of transcendental numbers.
In 1882, Ferdinand von Lindemann published the first complete proof that π is transcendental.
He first proved that e a is transcendental if a is a non-zero algebraic number.
Then, since e iπ = −1 is algebraic (see Euler's identity ), iπ must be transcendental.
But since i is algebraic, π must therefore be transcendental.
This approach was generalized by Karl Weierstrass to what is now known as the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem .
That π is transcendental implies that geometric constructions involving compass and straightedge cannot produce certain results, for example squaring the circle .
In 1900, David Hilbert posed a question about transcendental numbers, Hilbert's seventh problem : If a is an algebraic number that is not zero or one, and b is an irrational algebraic number, is a b necessarily transcendental?
The affirmative answer was provided in 1934 by the Gelfond–Schneider theorem .
This work was extended by Alan Baker in the 1960s in his work on lower bounds for linear forms in any number of logarithms (of algebraic numbers).
Properties   A transcendental number is a (possibly complex) number that is not the root of any integer polynomial.
Every real transcendental number must also be irrational , since a rational number is the root of an integer polynomial of degree one.
The set of transcendental numbers is uncountably infinite .
Since the polynomials with rational coefficients are countable , and since each such polynomial has a finite number of zeroes , the algebraic numbers must also be countable.
However, Cantor's diagonal argument proves that the real numbers (and therefore also the complex numbers ) are uncountable.
Since the real numbers are the union of algebraic and transcendental numbers, it is impossible for both subsets to be countable.
This makes the transcendental numbers uncountable.
No rational number is transcendental and all real transcendental numbers are irrational.
The irrational numbers contain all the real transcendental numbers and a subset of the algebraic numbers, including the quadratic irrationals and other forms of algebraic irrationals.
Applying any non-constant single-variable algebraic function to a transcendental argument yields a transcendental value.
For example, from knowing that π is transcendental, it can be immediately deduced that numbers such as     5  π    {\displaystyle 5\pi }   ,         π  −  3    2        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {\pi -3}{\sqrt {2}}}}   ,     (    π    −    3     )   8      {\displaystyle ({\sqrt {\pi }}-{\sqrt {3}})^{8}}   , and         π   5    +  7    4       {\displaystyle {\sqrt{\pi ^{5}+7}}}   are transcendental as well.
However, an algebraic function of several variables may yield an algebraic number when applied to transcendental numbers if these numbers are not algebraically independent .
For example, π and (1 − π ) are both transcendental, but π + (1 − π ) = 1 is obviously not.
It is unknown whether e + π , for example, is transcendental, though at least one of e + π and eπ must be transcendental.
More generally, for any two transcendental numbers a and b , at least one of a + b and ab must be transcendental.
To see this, consider the polynomial ( x − a )( x − b ) = x 2 − ( a + b ) x + a b .
If ( a + b ) and a b were both algebraic, then this would be a polynomial with algebraic coefficients.
Because algebraic numbers form an algebraically closed field , this would imply that the roots of the polynomial, a and b , must be algebraic.
But this is a contradiction, and thus it must be the case that at least one of the coefficients is transcendental.
The non-computable numbers are a strict subset of the transcendental numbers.
All Liouville numbers are transcendental, but not vice versa.
Any Liouville number must have unbounded partial quotients in its continued fraction expansion.
Using a counting argument one can show that there exist transcendental numbers which have bounded partial quotients and hence are not Liouville numbers.
Using the explicit continued fraction expansion of e , one can show that e is not a Liouville number (although the partial quotients in its continued fraction expansion are unbounded).
Kurt Mahler showed in 1953 that π is also not a Liouville number.
It is conjectured that all infinite continued fractions with bounded terms, that have a "simple" structure, and that are not eventually periodic are transcendental  (in other words, algebraic irrational roots of at least third degree polynomials do not have apparent pattern in their continued fraction expansions, since eventually periodic continued fractions correspond to quadratic irrationals, see Hermite's problem ).
Numbers proven to be transcendental   Numbers proven to be transcendental:  e a if a is algebraic and nonzero (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem ).
π (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem ).
e π , Gelfond's constant , as well as e − π /2 = i i (by the Gelfond–Schneider theorem ).
a b where a is algebraic but not 0 or 1, and b is irrational algebraic (by the Gelfond–Schneider theorem), in particular:       2    2       {\displaystyle 2^{\sqrt {2}}}   , the Gelfond–Schneider constant (or Hilbert number)  sin  a , cos  a , tan  a , csc  a , sec  a , and cot  a , and their hyperbolic counterparts , for any nonzero algebraic number a , expressed in radians (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem).
The fixed point of the cosine function (also referred to as the Dottie number  d ) – the unique real solution to the equation cos x = x , where x is in radians (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem).
ln  a if a is algebraic and not equal to 0 or 1, for any branch of the logarithm function (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem), in particular: the universal parabolic constant .
log b  a if a and b are positive integers not both powers of the same integer, and a is not equal to 1 (by the Gelfond–Schneider theorem).
Non-zero results of arcsin  a , arccos a , arctan a , arccsc a , arcsec a , arccot a and their hyperbolic counterparts , for any algebraic number a (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem).
The Bessel function of the first kind  J ν ( x ) , its first derivative, and the quotient          J   ν   ′   (  x  )     J   ν    (  x  )        {\displaystyle {\tfrac {J'_{\nu }(x)}{J_{\nu }(x)}}}   are transcendental when ν is rational and x is algebraic and nonzero,  and all nonzero roots of J ν (x) and J ' ν (x) are transcendental when ν is rational.
W ( a ) if a is algebraic and nonzero, for any branch of the Lambert W Function (by the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem), in particular: Ω the omega constant  W ( r , a ) if both a and the order r are algebraic such that     a  ≠  0    {\displaystyle a\neq 0}   , for any branch of the generalized Lambert W function.
√ x s , the square super-root of any natural number is either an integer or transcendental (by the Gelfond–Schneider theorem)       Γ   ⁡   (     1  3     )       {\displaystyle \operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {1}{3}}\right)\ }   ,        Γ   ⁡   (     1  4     )       {\displaystyle \operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {1}{4}}\right)\ }   ,  and      Γ   ⁡   (     1  6     )       {\displaystyle \operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {1}{6}}\right)\ }   .
The numbers        Γ   ⁡   (     2  3     )     ,    {\displaystyle \ \operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {2}{3}}\right)\ ,}           Γ   ⁡   (     3  4     )     ,    {\displaystyle \ \operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {3}{4}}\right)\ ,}   and        Γ   ⁡   (     5  6     )       {\displaystyle \ \operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {5}{6}}\right)\ }   are also known to be transcendental.
The numbers          1  π      Γ   ⁡    (     1  4     )    4        {\displaystyle \ {\tfrac {1}{\pi }}\operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {1}{4}}\right)^{4}\ }   and          1  π      Γ   ⁡    (     1  3     )    2        {\displaystyle \ {\tfrac {1}{\pi }}\operatorname {\Gamma } \left({\tfrac {1}{3}}\right)^{2}\ }   are also transcendental.
The values of Euler beta function       B   (  a  ,  b  )    {\displaystyle \mathrm {B} (a,b)}   (in which a , b and     a  +  b    {\displaystyle a+b}   are non-integer rational numbers).
0.64341054629 ...
,  Cahen's constant .
π  +  ln  ⁡  (  2  )  +    2    ln  ⁡  (  3  )    {\displaystyle \pi +\ln(2)+{\sqrt {2}}\ln(3)}   .
In general, all numbers of the form     π  +   β   1    ln  ⁡  (   a   1    )  +  ⋯  +   β   n    ln  ⁡  (   a   n    )    {\displaystyle \pi +\beta _{1}\ln(a_{1})+\cdots +\beta _{n}\ln(a_{n})}   are transcendental, where      β   j      {\displaystyle \beta _{j}}   are algebraic for all     1  ≤  j  ≤  n    {\displaystyle 1\leq j\leq n}   and      a   j      {\displaystyle a_{j}}   are non-zero algebraic for all     1  ≤  j  ≤  n    {\displaystyle 1\leq j\leq n}   (by the Baker's theorem ).
The Champernowne constants , the irrational numbers formed by concatenating representations of all positive integers.
Ω , Chaitin's constant (since it is a non-computable number).
The supremum limit of the Specker sequences (since they are non-computable numbers).
The so-called Fredholm constants, such as          ∑   n  =  0    ∞     10   −   2   n      =  0.
1      1    0    1    000    1    0000000    1    …    {\displaystyle \sum _{n=0}^{\infty }10^{-2^{n}}=0.
{\textbf {1}}{\textbf {1}}0{\textbf {1}}000{\textbf {1}}0000000{\textbf {1}}\ldots }    which also holds by replacing 10 with any algebraic number b > 1 .
arctan  ⁡  (  x  )   π      {\displaystyle {\frac {\arctan(x)}{\pi }}}   , for rational number x such that     x  ∉  {  0  ,  ±   1   }    {\displaystyle x\notin \{0,\pm {1}\}}   .
The values of the Rogers-Ramanujan continued fraction      R  (  q  )    {\displaystyle R(q)}   where      q   ∈   C     {\displaystyle {q}\in \mathbb {C} }   is algebraic and     0  <   |   q   |   <  1    {\displaystyle 0<|q|<1}   .
The lemniscatic values of theta function       ∑   n  =  −  ∞    ∞     q    n   2        {\displaystyle \sum _{n=-\infty }^{\infty }q^{n^{2}}}   (under the same conditions for      q     {\displaystyle {q}}   ) are also transcendental.
j ( q ) where      q   ∈   C     {\displaystyle {q}\in \mathbb {C} }   is algebraic but not imaginary quadratic (i.e, the exceptional set of this function is the number field whose degree of extension over      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is 2).
The values of the infinite series with fast convergence rate as defined by Y.
Gao and J.
Gao, such as      ∑   n  =  1    ∞       3   n     2    3   n          {\displaystyle \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {3^{n}}{2^{3^{n}}}}}   .
The real constant in the definition of van der Corput's constant involving the Fresnel integrals .
The real constant in the definition of Zolotarev-Schur constant involving the complete elliptic integral functions .
Gauss's constant and the related lemniscate constant .
Any number of the form      ∑   n  =  0    ∞        E   n    (   β    r   n      )     F   n    (   β    r   n      )       {\displaystyle \sum _{n=0}^{\infty }{\frac {E_{n}(\beta ^{r^{n}})}{F_{n}(\beta ^{r^{n}})}}}   (where      E   n    (  z  )    {\displaystyle E_{n}(z)}   ,      F   n    (  z  )    {\displaystyle F_{n}(z)}   are polynomials in variables     n    {\displaystyle n}   and     z    {\displaystyle z}   ,     β    {\displaystyle \beta }   is algebraic and     β  ≠  0    {\displaystyle \beta \neq 0}   ,     r    {\displaystyle r}   is any integer greater than 1).
Artificially constructed non- periodic numbers.
The Robbins constant in three-dimensional line picking problem .
The aforementioned Liouville constant for any algebraic b ∈ (0, 1) .
The sum of reciprocals of exponential factorials .
The Prouhet–Thue–Morse constant  and the related rabbit constant.
The Komornik–Loreti constant .
Any number for which the digits with respect to some fixed base form a Sturmian word .
The paperfolding constant (also named as "Gaussian Liouville number").
Constructed irrational numbers which are not simply normal in any base.
For β > 1       ∑   k  =  0    ∞     10   −   ⌊   β   k    ⌋     ;    {\displaystyle \sum _{k=0}^{\infty }10^{-\left\lfloor \beta ^{k}\right\rfloor };}    where     β  ↦  ⌊  β  ⌋    {\displaystyle \beta \mapsto \lfloor \beta \rfloor }   is the floor function .
3.300330000000000330033...
and its reciprocal 0.30300000303..., two numbers with only two different decimal digits whose nonzero digit positions are given by the Moser–de Bruijn sequence and its double.
The number        π  2          Y   0    (  2  )     J   0    (  2  )      −  γ    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {\pi }{2}}{\tfrac {Y_{0}(2)}{J_{0}(2)}}-\gamma }   , where Y α ( x ) and J α ( x ) are Bessel functions and γ is the Euler–Mascheroni constant .
Nesterenko proved in 1996 that     π  ,   e   π      {\displaystyle \pi ,e^{\pi }}   and     Γ  (  1   /   4  )    {\displaystyle \Gamma (1/4)}   are algebraically independent.
This results in the transcendence of the Weierstrass constant  and the number      ∑   n  =  2    ∞      1    n   4    −  1       {\displaystyle \sum _{n=2}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{n^{4}-1}}}   .
Possible transcendental numbers   Numbers which have yet to be proven to be either transcendental or algebraic:  Most sums, products, powers, etc.
of the number π and the number e , e.g.
eπ , e + π , π − e , π / e , π π , e e , π e , π √ 2 , e π 2 are not known to be rational, algebraically irrational or transcendental.
A notable exception is e π √ n (for any positive integer n ) which has been proven transcendental.
At least one of the numbers e e and e e 2 is transcendental, according to W.
D.
Brownawell (1974).
It has been shown that both e + π and π / e do not satisfy any polynomial equation of degree     ≤  8    {\displaystyle \leq 8}   and integer coefficients of average size 10 9 .
The Euler–Mascheroni constant  γ : In 2010 M.
Ram Murty and N.
Saradha found an infinite list of numbers containing γ / 4 such that all but at most one of them are transcendental.
In 2012 it was shown that at least one of γ and the Euler–Gompertz constant  δ is transcendental.
Apéry's constant  ζ (3) (whose irrationality was proved by Apéry ).
The reciprocal Fibonacci constant and reciprocal Lucas constant  (both of which have been proved to be irrational).
Catalan's constant , and the values of Dirichlet beta function at other even integers, β (4) , β (6) , ...
(not even proven to be irrational).
Khinchin's constant , also not proven to be irrational.
The Riemann zeta function at other odd positive integers, ζ (5) , ζ (7) , ...
(not proven to be irrational).
The Feigenbaum constants  δ and α , also not proven to be irrational.
Mills' constant and twin prime constant (also not proven to be irrational).
The cube super-root of any natural number is either an integer or irrational (by the Gelfond–Schneider theorem).
However, it is still unclear if the irrational numbers in the later case are all transcendental.
The second and later eigenvalues of the Gauss-Kuzmin-Wirsing operator , also not proven to be irrational.
The Copeland–Erdős constant , formed by concatenating the decimal representations of the prime numbers.
The relative density of regular prime numbers : in 1964, Siegel conjectured that its value is      e   −  1   /   2      {\displaystyle e^{-1/2}}   .
Γ  (  1   /   5  )    {\displaystyle \Gamma (1/5)}   has not been proven to be irrational.
Various constants whose value is not known with high precision, such as the Landau's constant and the Grothendieck constant .
Related conjectures:  Schanuel's conjecture ,  Four exponentials conjecture .
Proofs for specific numbers   A proof that e is transcendental   The first proof that the base of the natural logarithms, e , is transcendental dates from 1873.
We will now follow the strategy of David Hilbert (1862–1943) who gave a simplification of the original proof of Charles Hermite .
The idea is the following: Assume, for purpose of finding a contradiction , that e is algebraic.
Then there exists a finite set of integer coefficients c 0 , c 1 , ..., c n satisfying the equation:      c   0    +   c   1    e  +   c   2     e   2    +  ⋯  +   c   n     e   n    =  0  ,    c   0    ,   c   n    ≠  0    .
{\displaystyle c_{0}+c_{1}e+c_{2}e^{2}+\cdots +c_{n}e^{n}=0,\qquad c_{0},c_{n}\neq 0~.}
It is difficult to make use of the integer status of these coefficients when multiplied by a power of the irrational e , but we can absorb those powers into an integral which “mostly” will assume integer values.
For a positive integer k , define the polynomial      f   k    (  x  )  =   x   k          k  +  1    ,    {\displaystyle f_{k}(x)=x^{k}\left^{k+1},}   and multiply both sides of the above equation by      ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  x  )    e   −  x      d   x    ,    {\displaystyle \int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)\,e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\ ,}   to arrive at the equation:      c   0     (    ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +   c   1    e   (    ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +  ⋯  +   c   n     e   n     (    ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   =  0    .
{\displaystyle c_{0}\left(\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+c_{1}e\left(\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+\cdots +c_{n}e^{n}\left(\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)=0~.}
By splitting respective domains of integration, this equation can be written in the form     P  +  Q  =  0    {\displaystyle P+Q=0}   where         P     =   c   0     (    ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +   c   1    e   (    ∫   1    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +   c   2     e   2     (    ∫   2    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +  ⋯  +   c   n     e   n     (    ∫   n    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )       Q     =   c   1    e   (    ∫   0    1     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +   c   2     e   2     (    ∫   0    2     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )   +  ⋯  +   c   n     e   n     (    ∫   0    n     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x   )         {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P&=c_{0}\left(\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+c_{1}e\left(\int _{1}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+c_{2}e^{2}\left(\int _{2}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+\cdots +c_{n}e^{n}\left(\int _{n}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)\\Q&=c_{1}e\left(\int _{0}^{1}f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+c_{2}e^{2}\left(\int _{0}^{2}f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)+\cdots +c_{n}e^{n}\left(\int _{0}^{n}f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x\right)\end{aligned}}}   Here P will turn out to be an integer, but more importantly it grows quickly with k .
Lemma 1   There are arbitrarily large k such that          P   k  !
{\displaystyle \ {\tfrac {P}{k!
}}\ }   is a non-zero integer.
Recall the standard integral (case of the Gamma function )      ∫   0    ∞     t   j     e   −  t      d   t  =  j  !
{\displaystyle \int _{0}^{\infty }t^{j}e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t=j!}
valid for any natural number      j    {\displaystyle j}   .
More generally,  if     g  (  t  )  =   ∑   j  =  0    m     b   j     t   j      {\displaystyle g(t)=\sum _{j=0}^{m}b_{j}t^{j}}   then      ∫   0    ∞    g  (  t  )   e   −  t      d   t  =   ∑   j  =  0    m     b   j    j  !
{\displaystyle \int _{0}^{\infty }g(t)e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t=\sum _{j=0}^{m}b_{j}j!}
This would allow us to compute     P    {\displaystyle P}   exactly, because any term of     P    {\displaystyle P}   can be rewritten as      c   a     e   a     ∫   a    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  x      d   x  =   c   a     ∫   a    ∞     f   k    (  x  )   e   −  (  x  −  a  )      d   x  =   {      t     =  x  −  a      x     =  t  +  a       d   x     =   d   t      }   =   c   a     ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  t  +  a  )   e   −  t      d   t    {\displaystyle c_{a}e^{a}\int _{a}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-x}\,\mathrm {d} x=c_{a}\int _{a}^{\infty }f_{k}(x)e^{-(x-a)}\,\mathrm {d} x=\left\{{\begin{aligned}t&=x-a\\x&=t+a\\\mathrm {d} x&=\mathrm {d} t\end{aligned}}\right\}=c_{a}\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(t+a)e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t}   through a change of variables .
Hence     P  =   ∑   a  =  0    n     c   a     ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  t  +  a  )   e   −  t      d   t  =   ∫   0    ∞      (     ∑   a  =  0    n     c   a     f   k    (  t  +  a  )    )     e   −  t      d   t    {\displaystyle P=\sum _{a=0}^{n}c_{a}\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(t+a)e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t=\int _{0}^{\infty }{\biggl (}\sum _{a=0}^{n}c_{a}f_{k}(t+a){\biggr )}e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t}   That latter sum is a polynomial in     t    {\displaystyle t}   with integer coefficients, i.e., it is a linear combination of powers      t   j      {\displaystyle t^{j}}   with integer coefficients.
Hence the number     P    {\displaystyle P}   is a linear combination (with those same integer coefficients) of factorials     j  !
{\displaystyle j!}
; in particular     P    {\displaystyle P}   is an integer.
Smaller factorials divide larger factorials, so the smallest     j  !
occurring in that linear combination will also divide the whole of     P    {\displaystyle P}   .
We get that     j  !
from the lowest power      t   j      {\displaystyle t^{j}}   term appearing with a nonzero coefficient in       ∑   a  =  0    n     c   a     f   k    (  t  +  a  )     {\displaystyle \textstyle \sum _{a=0}^{n}c_{a}f_{k}(t+a)}   , but this smallest exponent     j    {\displaystyle j}   is also the multiplicity of     t  =  0    {\displaystyle t=0}   as a root of this polynomial.
f   k    (  x  )    {\displaystyle f_{k}(x)}   is chosen to have multiplicity     k    {\displaystyle k}   of the root     x  =  0    {\displaystyle x=0}   and multiplicity     k  +  1    {\displaystyle k+1}   of the roots     x  =  a    {\displaystyle x=a}   for     a  =  1  ,  …  ,  n    {\displaystyle a=1,\dots ,n}   , so that smallest exponent is      t   k      {\displaystyle t^{k}}   for      f   k    (  t  )    {\displaystyle f_{k}(t)}   and      t   k  +  1      {\displaystyle t^{k+1}}   for      f   k    (  t  +  a  )    {\displaystyle f_{k}(t+a)}   with     a  >  0    {\displaystyle a>0}   .
Therefore     k  !
divides     P    {\displaystyle P}   .
To establish the last claim in the lemma, that     P    {\displaystyle P}   is nonzero, it is sufficient to prove that     k  +  1    {\displaystyle k+1}   does not divide     P    {\displaystyle P}   .
To that end, let     k  +  1    {\displaystyle k+1}   be any prime larger than     n    {\displaystyle n}   and      |    c   0     |     {\displaystyle |c_{0}|}   .
We know from the above that     (  k  +  1  )  !
{\displaystyle (k+1)!}
divides each of       c   a     ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  t  +  a  )   e   −  t      d   t     {\displaystyle \textstyle c_{a}\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(t+a)e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t}   for     1  ⩽  a  ⩽  n    {\displaystyle 1\leqslant a\leqslant n}   , so in particular all of those are divisible by     k  +  1    {\displaystyle k+1}   .
It comes down to the first term       c   0     ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  t  )   e   −  t      d   t     {\displaystyle \textstyle c_{0}\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(t)e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t}   .
We have (see falling and rising factorials )      f   k    (  t  )  =   t   k           k  +  1    =         k  +  1     t   k    +   higher degree terms     {\displaystyle f_{k}(t)=t^{k}{\bigl }^{k+1}={\bigl }^{k+1}t^{k}+{\text{higher degree terms}}}   and those higher degree terms all give rise to factorials     (  k  +  1  )  !
or larger.
Hence     P  ≡   c   0     ∫   0    ∞     f   k    (  t  )   e   −  t      d   t  ≡   c   0           k  +  1    k  !
(  mod   (  k  +  1  )  )     {\displaystyle P\equiv c_{0}\int _{0}^{\infty }f_{k}(t)e^{-t}\,\mathrm {d} t\equiv c_{0}{\bigl }^{k+1}k!
{\pmod {(k+1)}}}   That right hand side is a product of nonzero integer factors less than the prime     k  +  1    {\displaystyle k+1}   , therefore that product is not divisible by     k  +  1    {\displaystyle k+1}   , and the same holds for     P    {\displaystyle P}   ; in particular     P    {\displaystyle P}   cannot be zero.
Lemma 2   For sufficiently large k ,      |     Q   k  !
|   <  1    {\displaystyle \left|{\tfrac {Q}{k!
}}\right|<1}   .
Note that          f   k     e   −  x       =   x   k          k  +  1     e   −  x          =    (   x  (  x  −  1  )  ⋯  (  x  −  n  )   )    k    ⋅   (   (  x  −  1  )  ⋯  (  x  −  n  )   e   −  x     )         =  u  (  x   )   k    ⋅  v  (  x  )        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}f_{k}e^{-x}&=x^{k}\left^{k+1}e^{-x}\\&=\left(x(x-1)\cdots (x-n)\right)^{k}\cdot \left((x-1)\cdots (x-n)e^{-x}\right)\\&=u(x)^{k}\cdot v(x)\end{aligned}}}    where u ( x ), v ( x ) are continuous functions of x for all x , so are bounded on the interval  .
That is, there are constants G , H > 0 such that        |    f   k     e   −  x     |   ≤   |   u  (  x  )    |    k    ⋅   |   v  (  x  )   |   <   G   k    H    for   0  ≤  x  ≤  n    .
{\displaystyle \ \left|f_{k}e^{-x}\right|\leq |u(x)|^{k}\cdot |v(x)|<G^{k}H\quad {\text{ for }}0\leq x\leq n~.}
So each of those integrals composing Q is bounded, the worst case being      |    ∫   0    n     f   k     e   −  x       d     x   |   ≤   ∫   0    n     |    f   k     e   −  x     |      d     x  ≤   ∫   0    n     G   k    H     d     x  =  n   G   k    H    .
{\displaystyle \left|\int _{0}^{n}f_{k}e^{-x}\ \mathrm {d} \ x\right|\leq \int _{0}^{n}\left|f_{k}e^{-x}\right|\ \mathrm {d} \ x\leq \int _{0}^{n}G^{k}H\ \mathrm {d} \ x=nG^{k}H~.}
It is now possible to bound the sum Q as well:      |   Q   |   <   G   k    ⋅  n  H   (    |    c   1     |   e  +   |    c   2     |    e   2    +  ⋯  +   |    c   n     |    e   n     )   =   G   k    ⋅  M    ,    {\displaystyle |Q|<G^{k}\cdot nH\left(|c_{1}|e+|c_{2}|e^{2}+\cdots +|c_{n}|e^{n}\right)=G^{k}\cdot M\ ,}    where M is a constant not depending on k .
It follows that        |    Q   k  !
|   <  M  ⋅     G   k     k  !
→  0    as   k  →  ∞    ,    {\displaystyle \ \left|{\frac {Q}{k!
}}\right|<M\cdot {\frac {G^{k}}{k!
}}\to 0\quad {\text{ as }}k\to \infty \ ,}    finishing the proof of this lemma.
Conclusion   Choosing a value of k satisfying both lemmas leads to a non-zero integer      (     P   k  !      )
{\displaystyle \left({\tfrac {P}{k!
}}\right)}   added to a vanishingly small quantity      (     Q   k  !      )
{\displaystyle \left({\tfrac {Q}{k!
}}\right)}   being equal to zero, is an impossibility.
It follows that the original assumption, that e can satisfy a polynomial equation with integer coefficients, is also impossible; that is, e is transcendental.
The transcendence of π   A similar strategy, different from Lindemann 's original approach, can be used to show that the number π is transcendental.
Besides the gamma-function and some estimates as in the proof for e , facts about symmetric polynomials play a vital role in the proof.
For detailed information concerning the proofs of the transcendence of π and e , see the references and external links.
Class of irrational numbers  In number theory , a Liouville number is a real number      x    {\displaystyle x}   with the property that, for every positive integer      n    {\displaystyle n}   , there exists a pair of integers     (  p  ,  q  )    {\displaystyle (p,q)}   with     q  >  1    {\displaystyle q>1}   such that      0  <   |   x  −    p  q     |   <    1   q   n        {\displaystyle 0<\left|x-{\frac {p}{q}}\right|<{\frac {1}{q^{n}}}}    Liouville numbers are "almost rational ", and can thus be approximated "quite closely" by sequences of rational numbers.
Precisely, these are transcendental numbers that can be more closely approximated by rational numbers than any algebraic  irrational number can be.
In 1844, Joseph Liouville showed that all Liouville numbers are transcendental,  thus establishing the existence of transcendental numbers for the first time.
It is known that π and e are not Liouville numbers.
The existence of Liouville numbers (Liouville's constant)   Liouville numbers can be shown to exist by an explicit construction.
For any integer     b  ≥  2    {\displaystyle b\geq 2}   and any sequence of integers     (   a   1    ,   a   2    ,  …  )    {\displaystyle (a_{1},a_{2},\ldots )}   such that      a   k    ∈  {  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  …  ,  b  −  1  }    {\displaystyle a_{k}\in \{0,1,2,\ldots ,b-1\}}   for all     k    {\displaystyle k}   and      a   k    ≠  0    {\displaystyle a_{k}\neq 0}   for infinitely many     k    {\displaystyle k}   , define the number      x  =   ∑   k  =  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !
{\displaystyle x=\sum _{k=1}^{\infty }{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!}}}}
In the special case when     b  =  10    {\displaystyle b=10}   , and      a   k    =  1    {\displaystyle a_{k}=1}   for all     k    {\displaystyle k}   , the resulting number     x    {\displaystyle x}   is called Liouville's constant:       L  =  0.
11    000    1    00000000000000000    1    0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000    1    …    {\displaystyle L=0.
{\color {red}11}000{\color {red}1}00000000000000000{\color {red}1}0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000{\color {red}1}\ldots }    It follows from the definition of     x    {\displaystyle x}   that its base -     b    {\displaystyle b}   representation is      x  =  (  0.
  a   1     a   2    000   a   3    00000000000000000   a   4    0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000   a   5    …   )   b      {\displaystyle x=(0.a_{1}a_{2}000a_{3}00000000000000000a_{4}0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000a_{5}\ldots )_{b}}    where the     n    {\displaystyle n}   th term is in the     n  !
th place.
Since this base-     b    {\displaystyle b}   representation is non-repeating it follows that     x    {\displaystyle x}   is not a rational number.
Therefore, for any rational number     p   /   q    {\displaystyle p/q}   ,      |   x  −  p   /   q   |   >  0    {\displaystyle |x-p/q|>0}   .
Now, for any integer     n  ≥  1    {\displaystyle n\geq 1}   ,      p   n      {\displaystyle p_{n}}   and      q   n      {\displaystyle q_{n}}   can be defined as follows:       q   n    =   b   n  !
;    p   n    =   q   n     ∑   k  =  1    n       a   k     b   k  !
=   ∑   k  =  1    n     a   k     b   n  !
−  k  !
{\displaystyle q_{n}=b^{n!
}\,;\quad p_{n}=q_{n}\sum _{k=1}^{n}{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}=\sum _{k=1}^{n}a_{k}b^{n!-k!}}
Then,          0  <   |   x  −     p   n     q   n       |      =   |   x  −   ∑   k  =  1    n       a   k     b   k  !
|   =   |    ∑   k  =  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !
−   ∑   k  =  1    n       a   k     b   k  !
|   =   |    (    ∑   k  =  1    n       a   k     b   k  !
+   ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !       )
|   =   ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !
≤   ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k  !
<   ∑   k  =  (  n  +  1  )  !
∞       b  −  1    b   k      =     b  −  1    b   (  n  +  1  )  !
+     b  −  1    b   (  n  +  1  )  !
+  1      +     b  −  1    b   (  n  +  1  )  !
+  2      +  ⋯  =     b  −  1     b   (  n  +  1  )  !
b   0       +     b  −  1     b   (  n  +  1  )  !
b   1       +     b  −  1     b   (  n  +  1  )  !
b   2       +  ⋯  =     b  −  1    b   (  n  +  1  )  !
∑   k  =  0    ∞      1   b   k            =     b  −  1    b   (  n  +  1  )  !
⋅    b   b  −  1     =    b   b   (  n  +  1  )  !
≤     b   n  !
b   (  n  +  1  )  !
=    1   b   (  n  +  1  )  !
−  n  !
=    1   b   (  n  +  1  )  n  !
=    1   b   n  (  n  !  )
+  n  !
=    1   b   (  n  !  )
n      =    1   q   n    n            {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}0<\left|x-{\frac {p_{n}}{q_{n}}}\right|&=\left|x-\sum _{k=1}^{n}{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}\right|=\left|\sum _{k=1}^{\infty }{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}-\sum _{k=1}^{n}{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}\right|=\left|\left(\sum _{k=1}^{n}{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}+\sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}\right)-\sum _{k=1}^{n}{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}\right|=\sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}\\&\leq \sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k!
}}}<\sum _{k=(n+1)!
}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k}}}={\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!
}}}+{\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!+1}}}+{\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!+2}}}+\cdots ={\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!
}b^{0}}}+{\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!
}b^{1}}}+{\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!
}b^{2}}}+\cdots ={\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!
}}}\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{b^{k}}}\\&={\frac {b-1}{b^{(n+1)!
}}}\cdot {\frac {b}{b-1}}={\frac {b}{b^{(n+1)!
}}}\leq {\frac {b^{n!}}{b^{(n+1)!
}}}={\frac {1}{b^{(n+1)!-n!
}}}={\frac {1}{b^{(n+1)n!-n!
}}}={\frac {1}{b^{n(n!)+n!-n!
}}}={\frac {1}{b^{(n!
)n}}}={\frac {1}{q_{n}^{n}}}\end{aligned}}}    Therefore, any such     x    {\displaystyle x}   is a Liouville number.
Notes on the proof   The inequality      ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !
{\displaystyle \sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!
}}}\leq \sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k!}}}}
follows since a k ∈ {0, 1, 2, ..., b −1} for all k , so at most a k = b −1.
The largest possible sum would occur if the sequence of integers ( a 1 , a 2 , ...) were ( b −1, b −1, ...), i.e.
a k = b −1, for all k .
∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !
{\displaystyle \sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {a_{k}}{b^{k!}}}}
will thus be less than or equal to this largest possible sum.
The strong inequality          ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k  !
∞       b  −  1    b   k            {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k!
}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k}}}\end{aligned}}}   follows from the motivation to eliminate the series by way of reducing it to a series for which a formula is known.
In the proof so far, the purpose for introducing the inequality in #1 comes from intuition that      ∑   k  =  0    ∞      1   b   k      =    b   b  −  1       {\displaystyle \sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{b^{k}}}={\frac {b}{b-1}}}   (the geometric series formula); therefore, if an inequality can be found from      ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       a   k     b   k  !
that introduces a series with ( b −1) in the numerator, and if the denominator term can be further reduced from      b   k  !
{\displaystyle b^{k!}}
to      b   k      {\displaystyle b^{k}}   , as well as shifting the series indices from 0 to     ∞    {\displaystyle \infty }   , then both series and ( b −1) terms will be eliminated, getting closer to a fraction of the form       1   b    exponent   ×  n        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{b^{{\text{exponent}}\times n}}}}   , which is the end-goal of the proof.
This motivation is increased here by selecting now from the sum      ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k  !
{\displaystyle \sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k!}}}}
a partial sum.
Observe that, for any term in      ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k  !
, since b ≥ 2, then        b  −  1    b   k  !
<     b  −  1    b   k        {\displaystyle {\frac {b-1}{b^{k!
}}}<{\frac {b-1}{b^{k}}}}   , for all k (except for when n =1).
Therefore,          ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k  !
<   ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k            {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k!
}}}<\sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k}}}\end{aligned}}}   (since, even if n =1, all subsequent terms are smaller).
In order to manipulate the indices so that k starts at 0, partial sum will be selected from within      ∑   k  =  n  +  1    ∞       b  −  1    b   k        {\displaystyle \sum _{k=n+1}^{\infty }{\frac {b-1}{b^{k}}}}   (also less than the total value since it's a partial sum from a series whose terms are all positive).
Choose the partial sum formed by starting at k = ( n +1)!
which follows from the motivation to write a new series with k =0, namely by noticing that      b   (  n  +  1  )  !
=   b   (  n  +  1  )  !
b   0      {\displaystyle b^{(n+1)!}=b^{(n+1)!
}b^{0}}   .
For the final inequality       b   b   (  n  +  1  )  !
{\displaystyle {\frac {b}{b^{(n+1)!
}}}\leq {\frac {b^{n!}}{b^{(n+1)!}}}}
, this particular inequality has been chosen (true because b ≥ 2, where equality follows if and only if  n =1) because of the wish to manipulate       b   b   (  n  +  1  )  !
{\displaystyle {\frac {b}{b^{(n+1)!}}}}
into something of the form       1   b    exponent   ×  n        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{b^{{\text{exponent}}\times n}}}}   .
This particular inequality allows the elimination of ( n +1)!
and the numerator, using the property that ( n +1)!
– n !
= ( n !)
n , thus putting the denominator in ideal form for the substitution      q   n    =   b   n  !
{\displaystyle q_{n}=b^{n!}}
Irrationality   Here the proof will show that the number       x  =  c   /   d    ,    {\displaystyle ~x=c/d~,}   where c and d are integers and       d  >  0    ,    {\displaystyle ~d>0~,}   cannot satisfy the inequalities that define a Liouville number.
Since every rational number can be represented as such       c   /   d    ,    {\displaystyle ~c/d~,}   the proof will show that no Liouville number can be rational .
More specifically, this proof shows that for any positive integer n large enough that        2   n  −  1    >  d  >  0      {\displaystyle ~2^{n-1}>d>0~}   , no pair of integers       (   p  ,   q   )      {\displaystyle ~(\,p,\,q\,)~}   exists that simultaneously satisfies the pair of bracketing inequalities      0  <   |   x  −      p    q     |   <    1     q   n          .
{\displaystyle 0<\left|x-{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\right|<{\frac {1}{\;q^{n}\,}}~.}
If the claim is true, then the desired conclusion follows.
Let p and q be any integers with       q  >  1    .
{\displaystyle ~q>1~.}
Then,       |   x  −      p    q     |   =   |       c    d    −      p    q     |   =       |   c   q  −  d   p   |      d   q       {\displaystyle \left|x-{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\right|=\left|{\frac {\,c\,}{d}}-{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\right|={\frac {\,|c\,q-d\,p|\,}{d\,q}}}    If      |   c   q  −  d   p   |   =  0    ,    {\displaystyle \left|c\,q-d\,p\right|=0~,}   then       |   x  −      p    q     |   =       |   c   q  −  d   p   |      d   q     =  0    ,    {\displaystyle \left|x-{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\right|={\frac {\,|c\,q-d\,p|\,}{d\,q}}=0~,}    meaning that such pair of integers       (   p  ,   q   )      {\displaystyle ~(\,p,\,q\,)~}   would violate the first inequality in the definition of a Liouville number, irrespective of any choice of n .
If, on the other hand, since        |   c   q  −  d   p   |   >  0    ,    {\displaystyle ~\left|c\,q-d\,p\right|>0~,}   then, since     c   q  −  d   p    {\displaystyle c\,q-d\,p}   is an integer, we can assert the sharper inequality      |   c   q  −  d   p   |   ≥  1    .
{\displaystyle \left|c\,q-d\,p\right|\geq 1~.}
From this it follows that       |   x  −      p    q     |   =       |   c   q  −  d   p   |      d   q     ≥    1    d   q        {\displaystyle \left|x-{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\right|={\frac {\,|c\,q-d\,p|\,}{d\,q}}\geq {\frac {1}{\,d\,q\,}}}    Now for any integer       n  >  1  +   log   2    ⁡  (  d  )    ,    {\displaystyle ~n>1+\log _{2}(d)~,}   the last inequality above implies       |   x  −      p    q     |   ≥    1    d   q      >    1     2   n  −  1    q      ≥    1     q   n          .
{\displaystyle \left|x-{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\right|\geq {\frac {1}{\,d\,q\,}}>{\frac {1}{\,2^{n-1}q\,}}\geq {\frac {1}{\;q^{n}\,}}~.}
Therefore, in the case        |   c   q  −  d   p   |   >  0      {\displaystyle ~\left|c\,q-d\,p\right|>0~}   such pair of integers       (   p  ,   q   )      {\displaystyle ~(\,p,\,q\,)~}   would violate the second inequality in the definition of a Liouville number, for some positive integer n .
Therefore, to conclude, there is no pair of integers       (   p  ,   q   )    ,    {\displaystyle ~(\,p,\,q\,)~,}   with       q  >  1    ,    {\displaystyle ~q>1~,}   that would qualify such an       x  =  c   /   d    ,    {\displaystyle ~x=c/d~,}   as a Liouville number.
Hence a Liouville number, if it exists, cannot be rational.
(The section on Liouville's constant proves that Liouville numbers exist by exhibiting the construction of one.
The proof given in this section implies that this number must be irrational .)
Uncountability   Consider, for example, the number  3.1400010000000000000000050000....
 3.14(3 zeros)1(17 zeros)5(95 zeros)9(599 zeros)2(4319 zeros)6...
where the digits are zero except in positions n !
where the digit equals the n th digit following the decimal point in the decimal expansion of π .
As shown in the section on the existence of Liouville numbers , this number, as well as any other non-terminating decimal with its non-zero digits similarly situated, satisfies the definition of a Liouville number.
Since the set of all sequences of non-null digits has the cardinality of the continuum , the same thing occurs with the set of all Liouville numbers.
Moreover, the Liouville numbers form a dense subset of the set of real numbers.
Liouville numbers and measure   From the point of view of measure theory , the set of all Liouville numbers     L    {\displaystyle L}   is small.
More precisely, its Lebesgue measure ,     λ  (  L  )    {\displaystyle \lambda (L)}   , is zero.
The proof given follows some ideas by John C.
Oxtoby .
: 8  For positive integers     n  >  2    {\displaystyle n>2}   and     q  ≥  2    {\displaystyle q\geq 2}   set:       V   n  ,  q    =   ⋃   p  =  −  ∞    ∞     (     p  q    −    1   q   n      ,    p  q    +    1   q   n       )     {\displaystyle V_{n,q}=\bigcup \limits _{p=-\infty }^{\infty }\left({\frac {p}{q}}-{\frac {1}{q^{n}}},{\frac {p}{q}}+{\frac {1}{q^{n}}}\right)}    then      L  ⊆   ⋃   q  =  2    ∞     V   n  ,  q    .
{\displaystyle L\subseteq \bigcup _{q=2}^{\infty }V_{n,q}.}
Observe that for each positive integer     n  ≥  2    {\displaystyle n\geq 2}   and     m  ≥  1    {\displaystyle m\geq 1}   , then      L  ∩  (  −  m  ,  m  )  ⊆   ⋃   q  =  2    ∞     V   n  ,  q    ∩  (  −  m  ,  m  )  ⊆   ⋃   q  =  2    ∞     ⋃   p  =  −  m  q    m  q     (     p  q    −    1   q   n      ,    p  q    +    1   q   n       )   .
{\displaystyle L\cap (-m,m)\subseteq \bigcup \limits _{q=2}^{\infty }V_{n,q}\cap (-m,m)\subseteq \bigcup \limits _{q=2}^{\infty }\bigcup \limits _{p=-mq}^{mq}\left({\frac {p}{q}}-{\frac {1}{q^{n}}},{\frac {p}{q}}+{\frac {1}{q^{n}}}\right).}
Since       |    (     p  q    +    1   q   n       )   −   (     p  q    −    1   q   n       )    |   =    2   q   n        {\displaystyle \left|\left({\frac {p}{q}}+{\frac {1}{q^{n}}}\right)-\left({\frac {p}{q}}-{\frac {1}{q^{n}}}\right)\right|={\frac {2}{q^{n}}}}    and     n  >  2    {\displaystyle n>2}   then          μ  (  L  ∩  (  −  m  ,   m  )  )     ≤   ∑   q  =  2    ∞     ∑   p  =  −  m  q    m  q      2   q   n      =   ∑   q  =  2    ∞       2  (  2  m  q  +  1  )    q   n            ≤  (  4  m  +  1  )   ∑   q  =  2    ∞      1   q   n  −  1      ≤  (  4  m  +  1  )   ∫   1    ∞       d  q    q   n  −  1      ≤     4  m  +  1    n  −  2     .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mu (L\cap (-m,\,m))&\leq \sum _{q=2}^{\infty }\sum _{p=-mq}^{mq}{\frac {2}{q^{n}}}=\sum _{q=2}^{\infty }{\frac {2(2mq+1)}{q^{n}}}\\&\leq (4m+1)\sum _{q=2}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{q^{n-1}}}\leq (4m+1)\int _{1}^{\infty }{\frac {dq}{q^{n-1}}}\leq {\frac {4m+1}{n-2}}.\end{aligned}}}    Now       lim   n  →  ∞       4  m  +  1    n  −  2     =  0    {\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }{\frac {4m+1}{n-2}}=0}    and it follows that for each positive integer     m    {\displaystyle m}   ,     L  ∩  (  −  m  ,  m  )    {\displaystyle L\cap (-m,m)}   has Lebesgue measure zero.
Consequently, so has     L    {\displaystyle L}   .
In contrast, the Lebesgue measure of the set of all real transcendental numbers is infinite (since the set of algebraic numbers is a null set ).
One could show even more - the set of Liouville numbers has Hausdorff dimension 0 (a property strictly stronger than having Lebesgue measure 0).
Structure of the set of Liouville numbers   For each positive integer n , set         U   n    =   ⋃   q  =  2    ∞       ⋃   p  =  −  ∞    ∞       {   x  ∈   R   :  0  <   |   x  −    p    q       |   <    1     q   n         }   =   ⋃   q  =  2    ∞       ⋃   p  =  −  ∞    ∞       (     p  q    −    1   q   n        ,      p    q      +    1     q   n         )   ∖   {    p    q      }       {\displaystyle ~U_{n}=\bigcup \limits _{q=2}^{\infty }~\bigcup \limits _{p=-\infty }^{\infty }~\left\{x\in \mathbb {R} :0<\left|x-{\frac {p}{\,q\,}}\right|<{\frac {1}{\;q^{n}\,}}\right\}=\bigcup \limits _{q=2}^{\infty }~\bigcup \limits _{p=-\infty }^{\infty }~\left({\frac {p}{q}}-{\frac {1}{q^{n}}}~,~{\frac {p}{\,q\,}}+{\frac {1}{\;q^{n}\,}}\right)\setminus \left\{{\frac {p}{\,q\,}}\right\}~}    The set of all Liouville numbers can thus be written as        L    =     ⋂   n  =  1    ∞     U   n      =     ⋂   n  ∈    N    1         ⋃   q  ⩾  2       ⋃   p  ∈   Z       (     (        p    q    −    1     q   n          ,        p    q    +    1     q   n          )   ∖   {        p    q      }     )     .
{\displaystyle ~L~=~\bigcap \limits _{n=1}^{\infty }U_{n}~=~\bigcap \limits _{n\in \mathbb {N} _{1}}~\bigcup \limits _{q\geqslant 2}~\bigcup \limits _{p\in \mathbb {Z} }\,\left(\,\left(\,{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}-{\frac {1}{\;q^{n}\,}}~,~{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}+{\frac {1}{\;q^{n}\,}}\,\right)\setminus \left\{\,{\frac {\,p\,}{q}}\,\right\}\,\right)~.}
Each        U   n        {\displaystyle ~U_{n}~}   is an open set ; as its closure contains all rationals (the       p   /   q      {\displaystyle ~p/q~}   from each punctured interval), it is also a dense subset of real line.
Since it is the intersection of countably many such open dense sets, L is comeagre , that is to say, it is a dense  G δ set.
Irrationality measure   The Liouville–Roth irrationality measure ( irrationality exponent,  approximation exponent, or Liouville–Roth constant ) of a real number     x    {\displaystyle x}   is a measure of how "closely" it can be approximated by rationals.
Generalizing the definition of Liouville numbers, instead of allowing any     n    {\displaystyle n}   in the power of     q    {\displaystyle q}   , we find the largest possible value for     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   such that     0  <   |   x  −    p  q     |   <    1   q   μ        {\displaystyle 0<\left|x-{\frac {p}{q}}\right|<{\frac {1}{q^{\mu }}}}   is satisfied by an infinite number of coprime integer pairs     (  p  ,  q  )    {\displaystyle (p,q)}   with     q  >  0    {\displaystyle q>0}   .
This maximum value of     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   is defined to be the irrationality measure of     x    {\displaystyle x}   .
: 246 For any value     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   less than this upper bound, the infinite set of all rationals     p   /   q    {\displaystyle p/q}   satisfying the above inequality yield an approximation of     x    {\displaystyle x}   .
Conversely, if     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   is greater than the upper bound, then there are at most finitely many     (  p  ,  q  )    {\displaystyle (p,q)}   with     q  >  0    {\displaystyle q>0}   that satisfy the inequality; thus, the opposite inequality holds for all larger values of     q    {\displaystyle q}   .
In other words, given the irrationality measure     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   of a real number     x    {\displaystyle x}   , whenever a rational approximation     x  ≈  p   /   q    {\displaystyle x\approx p/q}   ,     p  ,  q  ∈   N     {\displaystyle p,q\in \mathbb {N} }   yields     n  +  1    {\displaystyle n+1}   exact decimal digits, then        1   10   n      ≥   |   x  −    p  q     |   ≥    1   q   μ  +  ε        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{10^{n}}}\geq \left|x-{\frac {p}{q}}\right|\geq {\frac {1}{q^{\mu +\varepsilon }}}}    for any     ε  >  0    {\displaystyle \varepsilon >0}   , except for at most a finite number of "lucky"  pairs     (  p  ,  q  )    {\displaystyle (p,q)}   .
As a consequence of Dirichlet's approximation theorem every irrational number has irrationality measure at least 2.
On the other hand, an application of Borel-Cantelli lemma shows that almost all numbers have an irrationality measure equal to 2.
 : 246  Below is a table of known upper and lower bounds for the irrationality measures of certain numbers.
Number     x    {\displaystyle x}     Irrationality measure     μ  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \mu (x)}     Simple continued fraction         {\displaystyle }     Notes   Lower bound  Upper bound   Rational number        p  q      {\displaystyle {\frac {p}{q}}}   where     p  ,  q  ∈   Z     {\displaystyle p,q\in \mathbb {Z} }   and     q  ≠  0    {\displaystyle q\neq 0}     1  Finite continued fraction .
Every rational number       p  q      {\displaystyle {\frac {p}{q}}}   has an irrationality measure of exactly 1.
Examples include 1, 2 and 0.5    Irrational algebraic number      a    {\displaystyle a}     2  Infinite continued fraction.
Periodic if quadratic irrational .
By the Thue–Siegel–Roth theorem the irrationality measure of any irrational algebraic number is exactly 2.
Examples include square roots like       2    ,    3      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}},{\sqrt {3}}}   and       5      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {5}}}   and the golden ratio      φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   .
e   2   /   k    ,  k  ∈    Z    +      {\displaystyle e^{2/k},k\in \mathbb {Z} ^{+}}     2  Infinite continued fraction.
If the elements      a   n      {\displaystyle a_{n}}   of the continued fraction expansion of an irrational number     x    {\displaystyle x}   satisfy      a   n    <  c  n  +  d    {\displaystyle a_{n}<cn+d}   for positive     c    {\displaystyle c}   and     d    {\displaystyle d}   , the irrationality measure     μ  (  x  )  =  2    {\displaystyle \mu (x)=2}   .
Examples include     e    {\displaystyle e}   or      I   0    (  1  )   /    I   1    (  1  )    {\displaystyle I_{0}(1)/I_{1}(1)}   where the continued fractions behave predictably:     e  =      {\displaystyle e=}   and      I   0    (  1  )   /    I   1    (  1  )  =      {\displaystyle I_{0}(1)/I_{1}(1)=}           tanh  ⁡   (    1  k    )   ,  k  ∈    Z    +      {\displaystyle \tanh \left({\frac {1}{k}}\right),k\in \mathbb {Z} ^{+}}     2       tan  ⁡   (    1  k    )   ,  k  ∈    Z    +      {\displaystyle \tan \left({\frac {1}{k}}\right),k\in \mathbb {Z} ^{+}}     2        h   q    (  1  )    {\displaystyle h_{q}(1)}       2  2.49846...
 Infinite continued fraction.
q  ∈  {  ±  2  ,  ±  3  ,  ±  4  ,  .
{\displaystyle q\in \{\pm 2,\pm 3,\pm 4,...\}}   ,      h   q    (  1  )    {\displaystyle h_{q}(1)}   is a     q    {\displaystyle q}   -harmonic series.
ln    q    (  2  )    {\displaystyle {\text{ln}}_{q}(2)}       2  2.93832...
     q  ∈   {   ±    1  2    ,  ±    1  3    ,  ±    1  4    ,  .
.
  }
{\displaystyle q\in \left\{\pm {\frac {1}{2}},\pm {\frac {1}{3}},\pm {\frac {1}{4}},...\right\}}   ,      ln   q    ⁡  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \ln _{q}(x)}   is a     q    {\displaystyle q}   -logarithm.
ln   q    ⁡  (  1  −  z  )    {\displaystyle \ln _{q}(1-z)}       2  3.76338...
     q  ∈   {   ±    1  2    ,  ±    1  3    ,  ±    1  4    ,  .
{\displaystyle q\in \left\{\pm {\frac {1}{2}},\pm {\frac {1}{3}},\pm {\frac {1}{4}},...\right\}}   ,     0  <   |   z   |   ≤  1    {\displaystyle 0<|z|\leq 1}          ln  ⁡  (  2  )    {\displaystyle \ln(2)}       2  3.57455...
         {\displaystyle }            ln  ⁡  (  3  )    {\displaystyle \ln(3)}       2  5.11620...
         {\displaystyle }            ζ  (  3  )    {\displaystyle \zeta (3)}      2  5.51389...
         {\displaystyle }             π   2      {\displaystyle \pi ^{2}}   and     ζ  (  2  )    {\displaystyle \zeta (2)}       2  5.09541...
         {\displaystyle }   and         {\displaystyle }           π   2      {\displaystyle \pi ^{2}}   and     ζ  (  2  )  =   π   2     /   6    {\displaystyle \zeta (2)=\pi ^{2}/6}   are linearly dependent over      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   .
π    {\displaystyle \pi }       2  7.10320...
         {\displaystyle }     It has been proven that if the Flint Hills series       ∑   n  =  1    ∞        csc   2    ⁡  n    n   3         {\displaystyle \displaystyle \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {\csc ^{2}n}{n^{3}}}}   (where n is in radians) converges, then     π    {\displaystyle \pi }   's irrationality measure is at most 2.5;   and that if it diverges, the irrationality measure is at least 2.5.         arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   3  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/3)}      2  6.09675...
         {\displaystyle }     Of the form     arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   k  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/k)}          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   5  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/5)}      2  4.788...
         {\displaystyle }          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   6  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/6)}      2  6.24...
         {\displaystyle }          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   7  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/7)}      2  4.076...
         {\displaystyle }          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   10  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/10)}      2  4.595...
         {\displaystyle }          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   4  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/4)}      2  5.793...
         {\displaystyle }     Of the form     arctan  ⁡  (  1   /    2   k    )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/2^{k})}          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   8  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/8)}      2  3.673...
         {\displaystyle }          arctan  ⁡  (  1   /   16  )    {\displaystyle \arctan(1/16)}      2  3.068...
         {\displaystyle }          π   /     3      {\displaystyle \pi /{\sqrt {3}}}       2  4.60105...
         {\displaystyle }     Of the form       2  k  −  1    arctan  ⁡   (     2  k  −  1    k  −  1     )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2k-1}}\arctan \left({\frac {\sqrt {2k-1}}{k-1}}\right)}            7    arctan  ⁡  (     7     /   3   )    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {7}}\arctan({{\sqrt {7}}/3})}      2  3.94704...
         {\displaystyle }            11    arctan  ⁡  (     11     /   5   )    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {11}}\arctan({{\sqrt {11}}/5})}      2  3.76069...
         {\displaystyle }            15    arctan  ⁡  (     15     /   7   )    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {15}}\arctan({{\sqrt {15}}/7})}      2  3.66666...
         {\displaystyle }            19    arctan  ⁡  (     19     /   9   )    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {19}}\arctan({{\sqrt {19}}/9})}      2  3.60809...
         {\displaystyle }            23    arctan  ⁡  (     23     /   11   )    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {23}}\arctan({{\sqrt {23}}/11})}      2  3.56730...
         {\displaystyle }            7    ln  ⁡   (     4  +    7     3    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {7}}\ln \left({\frac {4+{\sqrt {7}}}{3}}\right)}      2  6.64610...
         {\displaystyle }     Of the form       2  k  +  1    ln  ⁡   (       2  k  +  1    +  1      2  k  +  1    −  1     )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2k+1}}\ln \left({\frac {{\sqrt {2k+1}}+1}{{\sqrt {2k+1}}-1}}\right)}            11    ln  ⁡   (     6  +    11     5    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {11}}\ln \left({\frac {6+{\sqrt {11}}}{5}}\right)}      2  5.82337...
         {\displaystyle }            13    ln  ⁡   (     7  +    13     6    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {13}}\ln \left({\frac {7+{\sqrt {13}}}{6}}\right)}      2  3.51433...
         {\displaystyle }            15    ln  ⁡   (     8  +    15     7    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {15}}\ln \left({\frac {8+{\sqrt {15}}}{7}}\right)}      2  5.45248...
         {\displaystyle }            17    ln  ⁡   (     9  +    17     8    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {17}}\ln \left({\frac {9+{\sqrt {17}}}{8}}\right)}      2  3.47834...
         {\displaystyle }            19    ln  ⁡   (     10  +    19     9    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {19}}\ln \left({\frac {10+{\sqrt {19}}}{9}}\right)}      2  5.23162...
         {\displaystyle }            21    ln  ⁡   (     11  +    21     10    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {21}}\ln \left({\frac {11+{\sqrt {21}}}{10}}\right)}      2  3.45356...
         {\displaystyle }            23    ln  ⁡   (     12  +    23     11    )     {\displaystyle {\sqrt {23}}\ln \left({\frac {12+{\sqrt {23}}}{11}}\right)}      2  5.08120...
         {\displaystyle }          5  ln  ⁡  (  3   /   2  )    {\displaystyle 5\ln(3/2)}      2  3.43506...
         {\displaystyle }            π   3     ±  ln  ⁡  (  3  )    {\displaystyle {\frac {\pi }{\sqrt {3}}}\pm \ln(3)}      2  4.5586...
         {\displaystyle }   and         {\displaystyle }              3    ln  ⁡  (  2  +    3    )  ±    π   3       {\displaystyle {\sqrt {3}}\ln(2+{\sqrt {3}})\pm {\frac {\pi }{\sqrt {3}}}}      2  6.1382...
         {\displaystyle }   and         {\displaystyle }            ln  ⁡  (  5  )  +    π  2      {\displaystyle \ln(5)+{\frac {\pi }{2}}}      2  59.976...
         {\displaystyle }             T   2    (  1   /   b  )  ,  b  ≥  2    {\displaystyle T_{2}(1/b),b\geq 2}      2  4  Infinite continued fraction.
T   2    (  1   /   b  )  :=   ∑   n  =  1    ∞     t   n     b   n  −  1      {\displaystyle T_{2}(1/b):=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }t_{n}b^{n-1}}   where      t   n      {\displaystyle t_{n}}   is the     n    {\displaystyle n}   -th term of the Thue–Morse sequence .
Champernowne constants       C   b      {\displaystyle C_{b}}   in base     b  ≥  2    {\displaystyle b\geq 2}          b    {\displaystyle b}     Infinite continued fraction.
Examples include      C   10    =  0.1234567891011...
 =      {\displaystyle C_{10}=0.1234567891011...=}      Liouville numbers     L    {\displaystyle L}         ∞    {\displaystyle \infty }     Infinite continued fraction, not behaving predictable.
The Liouville numbers are precisely those numbers having infinite irrationality measure.
: 248   Irrationality base   The irrationality base is a measure of irrationality introduced by J.
Sondow  as an irrationality measure for Liouville numbers.
It is defined as follows: Let     α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   be an irrational number.
If there exists a real number     β  ≥  1    {\displaystyle \beta \geq 1}   with the property that for any     ε  >  0    {\displaystyle \varepsilon >0}   , there is a positive integer     q  (  ε  )    {\displaystyle q(\varepsilon )}   such that       |   α  −    p  q     |   >    1   (  β  +  ε   )   q        for all integers   p  ,  q   with   q  ≥  q  (  ε  )    {\displaystyle \left|\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right|>{\frac {1}{(\beta +\varepsilon )^{q}}}{\text{ for all integers }}p,q{\text{ with }}q\geq q(\varepsilon )}   ,  then     β    {\displaystyle \beta }   is called the irrationality base of     α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   and is represented as     β  (  α  )    {\displaystyle \beta (\alpha )}    If no such     β    {\displaystyle \beta }   exists, then     α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   is called a super Liouville number .
Example : The series      ε   2  e    =  1  +    1   2   1      +    1   4    2   1        +    1   8    4    2   1          +    1   16    8    4    2   1            +    1   32    16    8    4    2   1              +  …    {\displaystyle \varepsilon _{2e}=1+{\frac {1}{2^{1}}}+{\frac {1}{4^{2^{1}}}}+{\frac {1}{8^{4^{2^{1}}}}}+{\frac {1}{16^{8^{4^{2^{1}}}}}}+{\frac {1}{32^{16^{8^{4^{2^{1}}}}}}}+\ldots }   is a super Liouville number , while the series      τ   2    =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞      1      n    2     =    1  2    +    1   2   2      +    1   2    2   2        +    1   2    2    2   2          +    1   2    2    2    2   2            +  …    {\displaystyle \tau _{2}=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{^{n}2}}={\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {1}{2^{2}}}+{\frac {1}{2^{2^{2}}}}+{\frac {1}{2^{2^{2^{2}}}}}+{\frac {1}{2^{2^{2^{2^{2}}}}}}+\ldots }   is a Liouville number with irrationality base 2.
(         b    a     {\displaystyle {^{b}a}}   represents tetration .)
Liouville numbers and transcendence   Establishing that a given number is a Liouville number provides a useful tool for proving a given number is transcendental.
However, not every transcendental number is a Liouville number.
The terms in the continued fraction expansion of every Liouville number are unbounded; using a counting argument, one can then show that there must be uncountably many transcendental numbers which are not Liouville.
Using the explicit continued fraction expansion of e , one can show that e is an example of a transcendental number that is not Liouville.
Mahler proved in 1953 that π is another such example.
The proof proceeds by first establishing a property of irrational  algebraic numbers .
This property essentially says that irrational algebraic numbers cannot be well approximated by rational numbers, where the condition for "well approximated" becomes more stringent for larger denominators.
A Liouville number is irrational but does not have this property, so it can't be algebraic and must be transcendental.
The following lemma is usually known as Liouville's theorem (on diophantine approximation) , there being several results known as Liouville's theorem .
Below, the proof will show that no Liouville number can be algebraic.
Lemma: If α is an irrational number which is the root of an irreducible polynomial  f of degree n > 0 with integer coefficients, then there exists a real number A > 0 such that, for all integers p , q , with q > 0,       |   α  −    p  q     |   >    A   q   n        {\displaystyle \left|\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right|>{\frac {A}{q^{n}}}}    Proof of Lemma: Let M be the maximum value of | f ′( x )| (the absolute value of the derivative of f ) over the interval .
Let α 1 , α 2 , ..., α m be the distinct roots of f which differ from α .
We can pick as A any value A > 0 satisfying     A  <  min   (   1  ,    1  M    ,   |   α  −   α   1     |   ,   |   α  −   α   2     |   ,  …  ,   |   α  −   α   m     |    )     {\displaystyle A<\min \left(1,{\frac {1}{M}},\left|\alpha -\alpha _{1}\right|,\left|\alpha -\alpha _{2}\right|,\ldots ,\left|\alpha -\alpha _{m}\right|\right)}   The main bound here is       1  M      {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{M}}}   ; the other bounds are there to handle easy cases.
Concretely, if     p   /   q    {\displaystyle p/q}   is not in the interval         {\displaystyle }   then      |   α  −    p  q     |   >  1  >  A  ⩾    A   q   n        {\displaystyle \left|\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right|>1>A\geqslant {\frac {A}{q^{n}}}}   as claimed.
Likewise if for some other root      α   i      {\displaystyle \alpha _{i}}   of f we have     p   /   q  ⩽   α   i    <  α    {\displaystyle p/q\leqslant \alpha _{i}<\alpha }   or     p   /   q  ⩾   α   i    >  α    {\displaystyle p/q\geqslant \alpha _{i}>\alpha }   then      |   α  −    p  q     |   ⩾   |   α  −   α   i     |   >  A  ⩾    A   q   n       .
{\displaystyle \left|\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right|\geqslant \left|\alpha -\alpha _{i}\right|>A\geqslant {\frac {A}{q^{n}}}{\text{.}}}
Hence is remains to handle the case that p / q is in the interval , is not in { α 1 , α 2 , ..., α m } (so p / q is not a root of f ), and there is no root of f between α and p / q .
By the mean value theorem , there exists an x 0 between p / q and α such that     f  (  α  )  −  f  (     p  q     )  =   (   α  −    p  q     )   ⋅   f  ′   (   x   0    )    {\displaystyle f(\alpha )-f({\tfrac {p}{q}})=\left(\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right)\cdot f'(x_{0})}   Since α is a root of f but p / q is not, both sides of that equality are nonzero.
In particular      |    f  ′   (   x   0    )   |   >  0    {\displaystyle |f'(x_{0})|>0}   and we can rearrange:      |   α  −    p  q     |   =     |   f  (  α  )  −  f  (     p  q     )   |     |    f  ′   (   x   0    )   |      =   |     f  (     p  q     )     f  ′   (   x   0    )     |     {\displaystyle \left|\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right|={\frac {\left|f(\alpha )-f({\tfrac {p}{q}})\right|}{|f'(x_{0})|}}=\left|{\frac {f({\tfrac {p}{q}})}{f'(x_{0})}}\right|}   Now, f is of the form      ∑   i  =  0    n      {\displaystyle \sum _{i=0}^{n}}    c i  x i where each c i is an integer, so for      |   f  (  p   /   q  )   |     {\displaystyle |f(p/q)|}   we have      |   f   (    p  q    )    |   =   |    ∑   i  =  0    n     c   i     p   i     q   −  i     |   =    1   q   n       |    ∑   i  =  0    n     c   i     p   i     q   n  −  i     |   ⩾    1   q   n        {\displaystyle \left|f\left({\frac {p}{q}}\right)\right|=\left|\sum _{i=0}^{n}c_{i}p^{i}q^{-i}\right|={\frac {1}{q^{n}}}\left|\sum _{i=0}^{n}c_{i}p^{i}q^{n-i}\right|\geqslant {\frac {1}{q^{n}}}}   where the last inequality holds because every term of that latter sum is an integer and the sum is nonzero.
Since      |    f  ′   (   x   0    )   |   ⩽  M    {\displaystyle |f'(x_{0})|\leqslant M}   by the definition of M , and 1/ M > A by the definition of A , it follows that      |   α  −    p  q     |   =   |     f  (     p  q     )     f  ′   (   x   0    )     |   ⩾    1   M   q   n       >    A   q   n        {\displaystyle \left|\alpha -{\frac {p}{q}}\right|=\left|{\frac {f({\tfrac {p}{q}})}{f'(x_{0})}}\right|\geqslant {\frac {1}{Mq^{n}}}>{\frac {A}{q^{n}}}}   proving the lemma in the remaining case.
Proof of assertion: As a consequence of this lemma, let x be a Liouville number; as noted in the article text, x is then irrational.
If x is algebraic, then by the lemma, there exists some integer n and some positive real A such that for all p , q        |   x  −    p  q     |   >    A   q   n        {\displaystyle \left|x-{\frac {p}{q}}\right|>{\frac {A}{q^{n}}}}    Let r be a positive integer such that 1/(2 r ) ≤ A .
If m = r + n , and since x is a Liouville number, then there exist integers a , b where b > 1 such that       |   x  −    a  b     |   <    1   b   m      =    1   b   r  +  n      =    1    b   r     b   n       ≤    1   2   r        1   b   n      ≤    A   b   n        {\displaystyle \left|x-{\frac {a}{b}}\right|<{\frac {1}{b^{m}}}={\frac {1}{b^{r+n}}}={\frac {1}{b^{r}b^{n}}}\leq {\frac {1}{2^{r}}}{\frac {1}{b^{n}}}\leq {\frac {A}{b^{n}}}}    which contradicts the lemma.
Hence a Liouville number cannot be algebraic, and therefore must be transcendental.
Exception to a proposed general rule  A counterexample is any exception to a generalization .
In logic a counterexample disproves the generalization, and does so rigorously in the fields of mathematics and philosophy .
For example, the fact that "student John Smith is not lazy" is a counterexample to the generalization "students are lazy", and both a counterexample to, and disproof of, the universal quantification "all students are lazy."
In mathematics, the term "counterexample" is also used (by a slight abuse) to refer to examples which illustrate the necessity of the full hypothesis of a theorem.
This is most often done by considering a case where a part of the hypothesis is not satisfied and the conclusion of the theorem does not hold.
In mathematics   In mathematics, counterexamples are often used to prove the boundaries of possible theorems.
By using counterexamples to show that certain conjectures are false, mathematical researchers can then avoid going down blind alleys and learn to modify conjectures to produce provable theorems.
It is sometimes said that mathematical development consists primarily in finding (and proving) theorems and counterexamples.
Rectangle example   Suppose that a mathematician is studying geometry and shapes , and she wishes to prove certain theorems about them.
She conjectures that "All rectangles are squares ", and she is interested in knowing whether this statement is true or false.
In this case, she can either attempt to prove the truth of the statement using deductive reasoning , or she can attempt to find a counterexample of the statement if she suspects it to be false.
In the latter case, a counterexample would be a rectangle that is not a square, such as a rectangle with two sides of length 5 and two sides of length 7.
However, despite having found rectangles that were not squares, all the rectangles she did find had four sides.
She then makes the new conjecture "All rectangles have four sides".
This is logically weaker than her original conjecture, since every square has four sides, but not every four-sided shape is a square.
The above example explained — in a simplified way — how a mathematician might weaken her conjecture in the face of counterexamples, but counterexamples can also be used to demonstrate the necessity of certain assumptions and hypothesis .
For example, suppose that after a while, the mathematician above settled on the new conjecture "All shapes that are rectangles and have four sides of equal length are squares".
This conjecture has two parts to the hypothesis: the shape must be 'a rectangle' and must have  'four sides of equal length'.
The mathematician then would like to know if she can remove either assumption, and still maintain the truth of her conjecture.
This means that she needs to check the truth of the following two statements:  "All shapes that are rectangles are squares."
"All shapes that have four sides of equal length are squares".
A counterexample to (1) was already given above, and a counterexample to (2) is a non-square rhombus .
Thus, the mathematician now knows that both assumptions were indeed necessary.
Other mathematical examples   See also: Counterexamples in topology and Minimal counterexample  A counterexample to the statement "all prime numbers are odd numbers " is the number 2, as it is a prime number but is not an odd number.
Neither of the numbers 7 or 10 is a counterexample, as neither of them are enough to contradict the statement.
In this example, 2 is in fact the only possible counterexample to the statement, even though that alone is enough to contradict the statement.
In a similar manner, the statement "All natural numbers are either prime or composite " has the number 1 as a counterexample, as 1 is neither prime nor composite.
Euler's sum of powers conjecture was disproved by counterexample.
It asserted that at least n  n th powers were necessary to sum to another n th power.
This conjecture was disproved in 1966,  with a counterexample involving n = 5; other n = 5 counterexamples are now known, as well as some n = 4 counterexamples.
Witsenhausen's counterexample shows that it is not always true (for control problems ) that a quadratic loss function and a linear equation of evolution of the state variable imply optimal control laws that are linear.
Other examples include the disproofs of the Seifert conjecture , the Pólya conjecture , the conjecture of Hilbert's fourteenth problem , Tait's conjecture , and the Ganea conjecture .
In philosophy   In philosophy , counterexamples are usually used to argue that a certain philosophical position is wrong by showing that it does not apply in certain cases.
Alternatively, the first philosopher can modify their claim so that the counterexample no longer applies; this is analogous to when a mathematician modifies a conjecture because of a counterexample.
For example, in Plato 's Gorgias , Callicles , trying to define what it means to say that some people are "better" than others, claims that those who are stronger are better.
But Socrates replies that, because of their strength of numbers, the class of common rabble is stronger than the propertied class of nobles, even though the masses are prima facie of worse character.
Thus Socrates has proposed a counterexample to Callicles' claim, by looking in an area that Callicles perhaps did not expect — groups of people rather than individual persons.
Callicles might challenge Socrates' counterexample, arguing perhaps that the common rabble really are better than the nobles, or that even in their large numbers, they still are not stronger.
But if Callicles accepts the counterexample, then he must either withdraw his claim, or modify it so that the counterexample no longer applies.
For example, he might modify his claim to refer only to individual persons, requiring him to think of the common people as a collection of individuals rather than as a mob.
As it happens, he modifies his claim to say "wiser" instead of "stronger", arguing that no amount of numerical superiority can make people wiser.
The shortest known proof of the four color theorem {{As of|2011|lc=on}} still has over 600 cases.<ref>See ].</ref>  Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "This article is about the type of mathematical proof.
For the method of calculating limits, see Method of exhaustion .
"Brute force method" redirects here.
For similarly named methods in other disciplines, see Brute force (disambiguation) .
"Proof by cases" redirects here.
For the concept in propositional logic, see Disjunction elimination .
Proof by exhaustion , also known as proof by cases , proof by case analysis , complete induction or the brute force method , is a method of mathematical proof in which the statement to be proved is split into a finite number of cases or sets of equivalent cases, and where each type of case is checked to see if the proposition in question holds.
This is a method of direct proof .
A proof by exhaustion typically contains two stages:  A proof that the set of cases is exhaustive; i.e., that each instance of the statement to be proved matches the conditions of (at least) one of the cases.
A proof of each of the cases.
The prevalence of digital computers has greatly increased the convenience of using the method of exhaustion (e.g., the first computer-assisted proof of four color theorem in 1976), though such approaches can also be challenged on the basis of mathematical elegance .
Expert systems can be used to arrive at answers to many of the questions posed to them.
In theory, the proof by exhaustion method can be used whenever the number of cases is finite.
However, because most mathematical sets are infinite, this method is rarely used to derive general mathematical results.
In the Curry–Howard isomorphism , proof by exhaustion and case analysis are related to ML-style pattern matching .
Example   Proof by exhaustion can be used to prove that if an integer is a perfect cube , then it must be either a multiple of 9, 1 more than a multiple of 9, or 1 less than a multiple of 9.
Proof : Each perfect cube is the cube of some integer n , where n is either a multiple of 3, 1 more than a multiple of 3, or 1 less than a multiple of 3.
So these three cases are exhaustive:  Case 1: If n = 3 p , then n 3 = 27 p 3 , which is a multiple of 9.
Case 2: If n = 3 p + 1, then n 3 = 27 p 3 + 27 p 2 + 9 p + 1, which is 1 more than a multiple of 9.
For instance, if n = 4 then n 3 = 64 = 9×7 + 1.
Case 3: If n = 3 p − 1, then n 3 = 27 p 3 − 27 p 2 + 9 p − 1, which is 1 less than a multiple of 9.
For instance, if n = 5 then n 3 = 125 = 9×14 − 1.
Elegance   Mathematicians prefer to avoid proofs by exhaustion with large numbers of cases, which are viewed as inelegant .
An illustration as to how such proofs might be inelegant is to look at the following proofs that all modern Summer Olympic Games are held in years which are divisible by 4: Proof : The first modern Summer Olympics were held in 1896, and then every 4 years thereafter (neglecting exceptions such as when the games were not held due to World War I and World War II along with the 2020 Tokyo Olympics being postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic .
).
Since 1896 = 474 × 4 is divisible by 4, the next Olympics would be in year 474 × 4 + 4 = (474 + 1) × 4, which is also divisible by four, and so on (this is a proof by mathematical induction ).
Therefore, the statement is proved.
The statement can also be proved by exhaustion by listing out every year in which the Summer Olympics were held, and checking that every one of them can be divided by four.
With 28 total Summer Olympics as of 2016, this is a proof by exhaustion with 28 cases.
In addition to being less elegant, the proof by exhaustion will also require an extra case each time a new Summer Olympics is held.
This is to be contrasted with the proof by mathematical induction, which proves the statement indefinitely into the future.
Number of cases   There is no upper limit to the number of cases allowed in a proof by exhaustion.
Sometimes there are only two or three cases.
Sometimes there may be thousands or even millions.
For example, rigorously solving a chess endgame  puzzle might involve considering a very large number of possible positions in the game tree of that problem.
The first proof of the four colour theorem was a proof by exhaustion with 1834 cases.
The shortest known proof of the four colour theorem today still has over 600 cases.
In general the probability of an error in the whole proof increases with the number of cases.
A proof with a large number of cases leaves an impression that the theorem is only true by coincidence, and not because of some underlying principle or connection.
Other types of proofs—such as proof by induction ( mathematical induction )—are considered more elegant .
However, there are some important theorems for which no other method of proof has been found, such as  The proof that there is no finite projective plane of order 10.
The classification of finite simple groups .
The Kepler conjecture .
The Boolean Pythagorean triples problem .
Statement in mathematics  Example of a four-colored map A four-colored map of the states of the United States (ignoring lakes and oceans)  In mathematics , the four color theorem , or the four color map theorem , states that no more than four colors are required to color the regions of any map so that no two adjacent regions have the same color.
Adjacent means that two regions share a common boundary of non-zero length (i.e., not merely a corner where three or more regions meet).
Initially, this proof was not accepted by all mathematicians because the computer-assisted proof was infeasible for a human to check by hand .
The proof has gained wide acceptance since then, although some doubts remain.
The theorem is a stronger version of the five color theorem , which can be shown using a significantly simpler argument.
Although the weaker five color theorem was proven already in the 1800s, the four color theorem resisted until 1976 when it was proven by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken .
This came after many false proofs and mistaken counterexamples in the preceding decades.
The Appel-Haken proof proceeds by analyzing a very large number of reducible configurations.
This was improved upon in 1997 by Robertson, Sanders, Seymour, and Thomas who have managed to decrease the number of such configurations to 633 - still an extremely long case analysis.
In 2005, the theorem was verified by Georges Gonthier using a general-purpose theorem-proving software .
Precise formulation of the theorem   In graph-theoretic terms, the theorem states that for loopless  planar graph      G    {\displaystyle G}   , its chromatic number is     χ  (  G  )  ≤  4    {\displaystyle \chi (G)\leq 4}   .
The intuitive statement of the four color theorem – "given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions, the regions can be colored using at most four colors so that no two adjacent regions have the same color" – needs to be interpreted appropriately to be correct.
First, regions are adjacent if they share a boundary segment; two regions that share only isolated boundary points are not considered adjacent.
(Otherwise, a map in a shape of a pie chart would make an arbitrarily large number of regions 'adjacent' to each other at a common corner, and require arbitrarily large number of colors as a result.)
Second, bizarre regions, such as those with finite area but infinitely long perimeter, are not allowed; maps with such regions can require more than four colors.
(To be safe, we can restrict to regions whose boundaries consist of finitely many straight line segments.
It is allowed that a region has enclaves , that is it entirely surrounds one or more other regions.)
Note that the notion of "contiguous region" (technically: connected  open subset of the plane) is not the same as that of a "country" on regular maps, since countries need not be contiguous (they may have exclaves , e.g., the Cabinda Province as part of Angola , Nakhchivan as part of Azerbaijan , Kaliningrad as part of Russia, France with its overseas territories , and Alaska as part of the United States are not contiguous).
If we required the entire territory of a country to receive the same color, then four colors are not always sufficient.
For instance, consider a simplified map:   In this map, the two regions labeled A belong to the same country.
If we wanted those regions to receive the same color, then five colors would be required, since the two A regions together are adjacent to four other regions, each of which is adjacent to all the others.
Forcing two separate regions to have the same color can be modelled by adding a 'handle' joining them outside the plane.
Such construction makes the problem equivalent to coloring a map on a torus (a surface of genus 1), which requires up to 7 colors for an arbitrary map.
A similar construction also applies if a single color is used for multiple disjoint areas, as for bodies of water on real maps, or there are more countries with disjoint territories.
In such cases more colors might be required with a growing genus of a resulting surface.
(See the section Generalizations below.)
A map with four regions, and the corresponding planar graph with four vertices.
A simpler statement of the theorem uses graph theory .
The set of regions of a map can be represented more abstractly as an undirected graph that has a vertex for each region and an edge for every pair of regions that share a boundary segment.
This graph is planar : it can be drawn in the plane without crossings by placing each vertex at an arbitrarily chosen location within the region to which it corresponds, and by drawing the edges as curves without crossings that lead from one region's vertex, across a shared boundary segment, to an adjacent region's vertex.
Conversely any planar graph can be formed from a map in this way.
In graph-theoretic terminology, the four-color theorem states that the vertices of every planar graph can be colored with at most four colors so that no two adjacent vertices receive the same color, or for short: every planar graph is four-colorable .
History   Early proof attempts   Letter of De Morgan to William Rowan Hamilton , 23 Oct.
1852  As far as is known,  the conjecture was first proposed on October 23, 1852,  when Francis Guthrie , while trying to color the map of counties of England, noticed that only four different colors were needed.
At the time, Guthrie's brother, Frederick , was a student of Augustus De Morgan (the former advisor of Francis) at University College London .
Francis inquired with Frederick regarding it, who then took it to De Morgan (Francis Guthrie graduated later in 1852, and later became a professor of mathematics in South Africa).
According to De Morgan:  A student of mine  asked me to day to give him a reason for a fact which I did not know was a fact—and do not yet.
He says that if a figure be any how divided and the compartments differently colored so that figures with any portion of common boundary line are differently colored—four colors may be wanted but not more—the following is his case in which four colors are wanted.
Query cannot a necessity for five or more be invented…    "F.G.", perhaps one of the two Guthries, published the question in The Athenaeum in 1854,  and De Morgan posed the question again in the same magazine in 1860.
Another early published reference by Arthur Cayley ( 1879 ) in turn credits the conjecture to De Morgan.
There were several early failed attempts at proving the theorem.
De Morgan believed that it followed from a simple fact about four regions, though he didn't believe that fact could be derived from more elementary facts.
This arises in the following way.
We never need four colours in a neighborhood unless there be four counties, each of which has boundary lines in common with each of the other three.
Such a thing cannot happen with four areas unless one or more of them be inclosed by the rest; and the colour used for the inclosed county is thus set free to go on with.
Now this principle, that four areas cannot each have common boundary with all the other three without inclosure, is not, we fully believe, capable of demonstration upon anything more evident and more elementary; it must stand as a postulate.
One proposed proof was given by Alfred Kempe in 1879, which was widely acclaimed;  another was given by Peter Guthrie Tait in 1880.
It was not until 1890 that Kempe's proof was shown incorrect by Percy Heawood , and in 1891, Tait's proof was shown incorrect by Julius Petersen —each false proof stood unchallenged for 11 years.
In 1890, in addition to exposing the flaw in Kempe's proof, Heawood proved the five color theorem and generalized the four color conjecture to surfaces of arbitrary genus.
Tait, in 1880, showed that the four color theorem is equivalent to the statement that a certain type of graph (called a snark in modern terminology) must be non- planar .
In 1943, Hugo Hadwiger formulated the Hadwiger conjecture ,  a far-reaching generalization of the four-color problem that still remains unsolved.
Proof by computer   During the 1960s and 1970s, German mathematician Heinrich Heesch developed methods of using computers to search for a proof.
Notably he was the first to use discharging for proving the theorem, which turned out to be important in the unavoidability portion of the subsequent Appel–Haken proof.
He also expanded on the concept of reducibility and, along with Ken Durre, developed a computer test for it.
Unfortunately, at this critical juncture, he was unable to procure the necessary supercomputer time to continue his work.
Others took up his methods, including his computer-assisted approach.
While other teams of mathematicians were racing to complete proofs, Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken at the University of Illinois announced, on June 21, 1976,  that they had proved the theorem.
They were assisted in some algorithmic work by John A.
Koch .
If the four-color conjecture were false, there would be at least one map with the smallest possible number of regions that requires five colors.
The proof showed that such a minimal counterexample cannot exist, through the use of two technical concepts:    An unavoidable set is a set of configurations such that every map that satisfies some necessary conditions for being a minimal non-4-colorable triangulation (such as having minimum degree 5) must have at least one configuration from this set.
A reducible configuration is an arrangement of countries that cannot occur in a minimal counterexample.
If a map contains a reducible configuration, the map can be reduced to a smaller map.
This smaller map has the condition that if it can be colored with four colors, this also applies to the original map.
This implies that if the original map cannot be colored with four colors the smaller map cannot either and so the original map is not minimal.
Using mathematical rules and procedures based on properties of reducible configurations, Appel and Haken found an unavoidable set of reducible configurations, thus proving that a minimal counterexample to the four-color conjecture could not exist.
Their proof reduced the infinitude of possible maps to 1,834 reducible configurations (later reduced to 1,482) which had to be checked one by one by computer and took over a thousand hours.
This reducibility part of the work was independently double checked with different programs and computers.
However, the unavoidability part of the proof was verified in over 400 pages of microfiche , which had to be checked by hand with the assistance of Haken's daughter Dorothea Blostein ( Appel & Haken 1989 ).
Appel and Haken's announcement was widely reported by the news media around the world, and the math department at the University of Illinois used a postmark stating "Four colors suffice."
At the same time the unusual nature of the proof—it was the first major theorem to be proved with extensive computer assistance—and the complexity of the human-verifiable portion aroused considerable controversy.
In the early 1980s, rumors spread of a flaw in the Appel–Haken proof.
Ulrich Schmidt at RWTH Aachen had examined Appel and Haken's proof for his master's thesis that was published in 1981.
He had checked about 40% of the unavoidability portion and found a significant error in the discharging procedure ( Appel & Haken 1989 ).
In 1986, Appel and Haken were asked by the editor of Mathematical Intelligencer to write an article addressing the rumors of flaws in their proof.
They replied that the rumors were due to a "misinterpretation of  results" and obliged with a detailed article.
Their magnum opus , Every Planar Map is Four-Colorable , a book claiming a complete and detailed proof (with a microfiche supplement of over 400 pages), appeared in 1989; it explained and corrected the error discovered by Schmidt as well as several further errors found by others ( Appel & Haken 1989 ).
Simplification and verification   Since the proving of the theorem, a new approach has led to both a shorter proof and a more efficient algorithm for 4-coloring maps.
In 1996, Neil Robertson , Daniel P.
Sanders , Paul Seymour , and Robin Thomas created a quadratic-time algorithm (requiring only O ( n 2 ) time, where n is the number of vertices), improving on a quartic -time algorithm based on Appel and Haken's proof.
The new proof, based on the same ideas, is similar to Appel and Haken's but more efficient because it reduces the complexity of the problem and requires checking only 633 reducible configurations.
Both the unavoidability and reducibility parts of this new proof must be executed by a computer and are impractical to check by hand.
In 2001, the same authors announced an alternative proof, by proving the snark conjecture.
This proof remains unpublished, however.
In 2005, Benjamin Werner and Georges Gonthier formalized a proof of the theorem inside the Coq proof assistant.
This removed the need to trust the various computer programs used to verify particular cases; it is only necessary to trust the Coq kernel.
Summary of proof ideas   This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .
( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  The following discussion is a summary based on the introduction to Every Planar Map is Four Colorable ( Appel & Haken 1989 ).
Although flawed, Kempe's original purported proof of the four color theorem provided some of the basic tools later used to prove it.
The explanation here is reworded in terms of the modern graph theory formulation above.
Kempe's argument goes as follows.
First, if planar regions separated by the graph are not triangulated , i.e.
do not have exactly three edges in their boundaries, we can add edges without introducing new vertices in order to make every region triangular, including the unbounded outer region.
If this triangulated graph is colorable using four colors or fewer, so is the original graph since the same coloring is valid if edges are removed.
So it suffices to prove the four color theorem for triangulated graphs to prove it for all planar graphs, and without loss of generality we assume the graph is triangulated.
Suppose v , e , and f are the number of vertices, edges, and regions (faces).
Since each region is triangular and each edge is shared by two regions, we have that 2 e = 3 f .
This together with Euler's formula , v − e + f = 2, can be used to show that 6 v − 2 e = 12.
Now, the degree of a vertex is the number of edges abutting it.
If v n is the number of vertices of degree n and D is the maximum degree of any vertex,      6  v  −  2  e  =  6   ∑   i  =  1    D     v   i    −   ∑   i  =  1    D    i   v   i    =   ∑   i  =  1    D    (  6  −  i  )   v   i    =  12.
{\displaystyle 6v-2e=6\sum _{i=1}^{D}v_{i}-\sum _{i=1}^{D}iv_{i}=\sum _{i=1}^{D}(6-i)v_{i}=12.}
But since 12 > 0 and 6 − i ≤ 0 for all i ≥ 6, this demonstrates that there is at least one vertex of degree 5 or less.
If there is a graph requiring 5 colors, then there is a minimal such graph, where removing any vertex makes it four-colorable.
Call this graph G .
Then G cannot have a vertex of degree 3 or less, because if d ( v ) ≤ 3, we can remove v from G , four-color the smaller graph, then add back v and extend the four-coloring to it by choosing a color different from its neighbors.
A graph containing a Kempe chain consisting of alternating blue and red vertices  Kempe also showed correctly that G can have no vertex of degree 4.
As before we remove the vertex v and four-color the remaining vertices.
If all four neighbors of v are different colors, say red, green, blue, and yellow in clockwise order, we look for an alternating path of vertices colored red and blue joining the red and blue neighbors.
Such a path is called a Kempe chain .
There may be a Kempe chain joining the red and blue neighbors, and there may be a Kempe chain joining the green and yellow neighbors, but not both, since these two paths would necessarily intersect, and the vertex where they intersect cannot be colored.
Suppose it is the red and blue neighbors that are not chained together.
Explore all vertices attached to the red neighbor by red-blue alternating paths, and then reverse the colors red and blue on all these vertices.
The result is still a valid four-coloring, and v can now be added back and colored red.
This leaves only the case where G has a vertex of degree 5; but Kempe's argument was flawed for this case.
Heawood noticed Kempe's mistake and also observed that if one was satisfied with proving only five colors are needed, one could run through the above argument (changing only that the minimal counterexample requires 6 colors) and use Kempe chains in the degree 5 situation to prove the five color theorem .
In any case, to deal with this degree 5 vertex case requires a more complicated notion than removing a vertex.
Rather the form of the argument is generalized to considering configurations , which are connected subgraphs of G with the degree of each vertex (in G) specified.
For example, the case described in degree 4 vertex situation is the configuration consisting of a single vertex labelled as having degree 4 in G .
As above, it suffices to demonstrate that if the configuration is removed and the remaining graph four-colored, then the coloring can be modified in such a way that when the configuration is re-added, the four-coloring can be extended to it as well.
A configuration for which this is possible is called a reducible configuration .
If at least one of a set of configurations must occur somewhere in G, that set is called unavoidable .
The argument above began by giving an unavoidable set of five configurations (a single vertex with degree 1, a single vertex with degree 2, ..., a single vertex with degree 5) and then proceeded to show that the first 4 are reducible; to exhibit an unavoidable set of configurations where every configuration in the set is reducible would prove the theorem.
Because G is triangular, the degree of each vertex in a configuration is known, and all edges internal to the configuration are known, the number of vertices in G adjacent to a given configuration is fixed, and they are joined in a cycle.
These vertices form the ring of the configuration; a configuration with k vertices in its ring is a k -ring configuration, and the configuration together with its ring is called the ringed configuration .
As in the simple cases above, one may enumerate all distinct four-colorings of the ring; any coloring that can be extended without modification to a coloring of the configuration is called initially good .
For example, the single-vertex configuration above with 3 or less neighbors were initially good.
In general, the surrounding graph must be systematically recolored to turn the ring's coloring into a good one, as was done in the case above where there were 4 neighbors; for a general configuration with a larger ring, this requires more complex techniques.
Because of the large number of distinct four-colorings of the ring, this is the primary step requiring computer assistance.
Finally, it remains to identify an unavoidable set of configurations amenable to reduction by this procedure.
The primary method used to discover such a set is the method of discharging .
The intuitive idea underlying discharging is to consider the planar graph as an electrical network.
Initially positive and negative "electrical charge" is distributed amongst the vertices so that the total is positive.
Recall the formula above:       ∑   i  =  1    D    (  6  −  i  )   v   i    =  12.
{\displaystyle \sum _{i=1}^{D}(6-i)v_{i}=12.}
Each vertex is assigned an initial charge of 6-deg( v ).
Then one "flows" the charge by systematically redistributing the charge from a vertex to its neighboring vertices according to a set of rules, the discharging procedure .
Since charge is preserved, some vertices still have positive charge.
The rules restrict the possibilities for configurations of positively charged vertices, so enumerating all such possible configurations gives an unavoidable set.
As long as some member of the unavoidable set is not reducible, the discharging procedure is modified to eliminate it (while introducing other configurations).
Appel and Haken's final discharging procedure was extremely complex and, together with a description of the resulting unavoidable configuration set, filled a 400-page volume, but the configurations it generated could be checked mechanically to be reducible.
Verifying the volume describing the unavoidable configuration set itself was done by peer review over a period of several years.
A technical detail not discussed here but required to complete the proof is immersion reducibility .
False disproofs   The four color theorem has been notorious for attracting a large number of false proofs and disproofs in its long history.
At first, The New York Times refused, as a matter of policy, to report on the Appel–Haken proof, fearing that the proof would be shown false like the ones before it.
Some alleged proofs, like Kempe's and Tait's mentioned above, stood under public scrutiny for over a decade before they were refuted.
But many more, authored by amateurs, were never published at all.
In the first map, which exceeds four colors, replacing the red regions with any of the four other colors would not work, and the example may initially appear to violate the theorem.
However, the colors can be rearranged, as seen in the second map.
Generally, the simplest, though invalid, counterexamples attempt to create one region which touches all other regions.
This forces the remaining regions to be colored with only three colors.
Because the four color theorem is true, this is always possible; however, because the person drawing the map is focused on the one large region, they fail to notice that the remaining regions can in fact be colored with three colors.
This trick can be generalized: there are many maps where if the colors of some regions are selected beforehand, it becomes impossible to color the remaining regions without exceeding four colors.
A casual verifier of the counterexample may not think to change the colors of these regions, so that the counterexample will appear as though it is valid.
Perhaps one effect underlying this common misconception is the fact that the color restriction is not transitive : a region only has to be colored differently from regions it touches directly, not regions touching regions that it touches.
If this were the restriction, planar graphs would require arbitrarily large numbers of colors.
Other false disproofs violate the assumptions of the theorem, such as using a region that consists of multiple disconnected parts, or disallowing regions of the same color from touching at a point.
Three-coloring   Proof without words that a map of US states needs at least four colors.
While every planar map can be colored with four colors, it is NP-complete in complexity to decide whether an arbitrary planar map can be colored with just three colors.
A cubic map can be colored with only three colors if and only if each interior region has an even number of neighboring regions.
In the US states map example, landlocked Missouri ( MO ) has eight neighbors (an even number): it must be differently colored from all of them, but the neighbors can alternate colors, thus this part of the map needs only three colors.
However, landlocked Nevada ( NV ) has five neighbors (an odd number): one of the neighbors must be differently colored from it and all the others, thus four colors are needed here.
Generalizations   Infinite graphs   By joining the single arrows together and the double arrows together, one obtains a torus with seven mutually touching regions; therefore seven colors are necessary.
This construction shows the torus divided into the maximum of seven regions, each one of which touches every other.
The four color theorem applies not only to finite planar graphs, but also to infinite graphs that can be drawn without crossings in the plane, and even more generally to infinite graphs (possibly with an uncountable number of vertices) for which every finite subgraph is planar.
To prove this, one can combine a proof of the theorem for finite planar graphs with the De Bruijn–Erdős theorem stating that, if every finite subgraph of an infinite graph is k -colorable, then the whole graph is also k -colorable Nash-Williams (1967) .
This can also be seen as an immediate consequence of Kurt Gödel 's compactness theorem for first-order logic , simply by expressing the colorability of an infinite graph with a set of logical formulae.
Higher surfaces   One can also consider the coloring problem on surfaces other than the plane.
The problem on the sphere or cylinder is equivalent to that on the plane.
For closed (orientable or non-orientable) surfaces with positive genus , the maximum number p of colors needed depends on the surface's Euler characteristic χ according to the formula      p  =   ⌊     7  +    49  −  24  χ     2    ⌋   ,    {\displaystyle p=\left\lfloor {\frac {7+{\sqrt {49-24\chi }}}{2}}\right\rfloor ,}    where the outermost brackets denote the floor function .
Alternatively, for an orientable surface the formula can be given in terms of the genus of a surface, g :      p  =   ⌊     7  +    1  +  48  g     2    ⌋   .
{\displaystyle p=\left\lfloor {\frac {7+{\sqrt {1+48g}}}{2}}\right\rfloor .}
This formula, the Heawood conjecture , was proposed by P.
J.
Heawood in 1890 and, after contributions by several people, proved by Gerhard Ringel and J.
W.
T.
Youngs in 1968.
The only exception to the formula is the Klein bottle , which has Euler characteristic 0 (hence the formula gives p = 7) but requires only 6 colors, as shown by Philip Franklin in 1934.
For example, the torus has Euler characteristic χ = 0 (and genus g = 1) and thus p = 7, so no more than 7 colors are required to color any map on a torus.
This upper bound of 7 is sharp : certain toroidal polyhedra such as the Szilassi polyhedron require seven colors.
A Möbius strip requires six colors ( Tietze 1910 ) as do 1-planar graphs (graphs drawn with at most one simple crossing per edge) ( Borodin 1984 ).
If both the vertices and the faces of a planar graph are colored, in such a way that no two adjacent vertices, faces, or vertex-face pair have the same color, then again at most six colors are needed ( Borodin 1984 ).
A radially symmetric 7-colored torus – regions of the same colour wrap around along dotted lines     An 8-coloured double torus (genus-two surface) – bubbles denote unique combination of two regions     A 6-colored Klein bottle     Tietze's subdivision of a Möbius strip into six mutually adjacent regions, requiring six colors.
The vertices and edges of the subdivision form an embedding of Tietze's graph onto the strip.
Interactive Szilassi polyhedron model with each of 7 faces adjacent to every other – in the SVG image , move the mouse to rotate it     Proof without words that the number of colours needed is unbounded in three or more dimensions    For graphs whose vertices are represented as pairs of points on two distinct surfaces, with edges drawn as non-crossing curves on one of the two surfaces, the chromatic number can be at least 9 and is at most 12, but more precise bounds are not known; this is Gerhard Ringel 's Earth–Moon problem .
Solid regions   There is no obvious extension of the coloring result to three-dimensional solid regions.
By using a set of n flexible rods, one can arrange that every rod touches every other rod.
The set would then require n colors, or n +1 including the empty space that also touches every rod.
The number n can be taken to be any integer, as large as desired.
Such examples were known to Fredrick Guthrie in 1880.
Even for axis-parallel cuboids (considered to be adjacent when two cuboids share a two-dimensional boundary area) an unbounded number of colors may be necessary ( Reed & Allwright 2008 ; Magnant & Martin (2011) ).
Relation to other areas of mathematics   Dror Bar-Natan gave a statement concerning Lie algebras and Vassiliev invariants which is equivalent to the four color theorem.
Use outside of mathematics   Despite the motivation from coloring political maps of countries , the theorem is not of particular interest to cartographers .
According to an article by the math historian Kenneth May , "Maps utilizing only four colors are rare, and those that do usually require only three.
Books on cartography and the history of mapmaking do not mention the four-color property".
The theorem also does not guarantee the usual cartographic requirement that non-contiguous regions of the same country (such as the exclave Alaska and the rest of the United States ) be colored identically.
===Probabilistic proof===
{{Main|Probabilistic method}}
A probabilistic proof is one in which an example is shown to exist, with certainty, by using methods of ].
''Journal of Philosophy'' 94:165–86.</ref>  Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Nonconstructive method for mathematical proofs  In mathematics , the probabilistic method is a nonconstructive method, primarily used in combinatorics and pioneered by Paul Erdős , for proving the existence of a prescribed kind of mathematical object.
It works by showing that if one randomly chooses objects from a specified class, the probability that the result is of the prescribed kind is strictly greater than zero.
Although the proof uses probability, the final conclusion is determined for certain , without any possible error.
This method has now been applied to other areas of mathematics such as number theory , linear algebra , and real analysis , as well as in computer science (e.g.
randomized rounding ), and information theory .
Introduction   If every object in a collection of objects fails to have a certain property, then the probability that a random object chosen from the collection has that property is zero.
Similarly, showing that the probability is (strictly) less than 1 can be used to prove the existence of an object that does not satisfy the prescribed properties.
Another way to use the probabilistic method is by calculating the expected value of some random variable .
If it can be shown that the random variable can take on a value less than the expected value, this proves that the random variable can also take on some value greater than the expected value.
Alternatively, the probabilistic method can also be used to guarantee the existence of a desired element in a sample space with a value that is greater than or equal to the calculated expected value, since the non-existence of such element would imply every element in the sample space is less than the expected value, a contradiction.
Common tools used in the probabilistic method include Markov's inequality , the Chernoff bound , and the Lovász local lemma .
Two examples due to Erdős   Although others before him proved theorems via the probabilistic method (for example, Szele's 1943 result that there exist tournaments containing a large number of Hamiltonian cycles ), many of the most well known proofs using this method are due to Erdős.
The first example below describes one such result from 1947 that gives a proof of a lower bound for the Ramsey number  R ( r , r ) .
First example   Suppose we have a complete graph on n  vertices .
We wish to show (for small enough values of n ) that it is possible to color the edges of the graph in two colors (say red and blue) so that there is no complete subgraph on r vertices which is monochromatic (every edge colored the same color).
To do so, we color the graph randomly.
Color each edge independently with probability 1/2 of being red and 1/2 of being blue.
We calculate the expected number of monochromatic subgraphs on r vertices as follows: For any set      S   r      {\displaystyle S_{r}}   of     r    {\displaystyle r}   vertices from our graph, define the variable     X  (   S   r    )    {\displaystyle X(S_{r})}   to be 1 if every edge amongst the     r    {\displaystyle r}   vertices is the same color, and 0 otherwise.
Note that the number of monochromatic     r    {\displaystyle r}   -subgraphs is the sum of     X  (   S   r    )    {\displaystyle X(S_{r})}   over all possible subsets       S   r      {\displaystyle S_{r}}   .
For any individual set      S   r    i      {\displaystyle S_{r}^{i}}   , the expected value of     X  (   S   r    i    )    {\displaystyle X(S_{r}^{i})}   is simply the probability that all of the     C  (  r  ,  2  )    {\displaystyle C(r,2)}   edges in      S   r    i      {\displaystyle S_{r}^{i}}   are the same color:      E    =  2  ⋅   2   −     (    r  2    )         {\displaystyle E=2\cdot 2^{-{r \choose 2}}}    (the factor of 2 comes because there are two possible colors).
This holds true for any of the     C  (  n  ,  r  )    {\displaystyle C(n,r)}   possible subsets we could have chosen, i.e.
i    {\displaystyle i}   ranges from 1 to     C  (  n  ,  r  )    {\displaystyle C(n,r)}   .
So we have that the sum of     E      {\displaystyle E}   over all      S   r    i      {\displaystyle S_{r}^{i}}   is       ∑   i  =  1    C  (  n  ,  r  )    E    =     (    n  r    )      2   1  −     (    r  2    )       .
{\displaystyle \sum _{i=1}^{C(n,r)}E={n \choose r}2^{1-{r \choose 2}}.}
The sum of expectations is the expectation of the sum ( regardless of whether the variables are independent ), so the expectation of the sum (the expected number of all monochromatic     r    {\displaystyle r}   -subgraphs) is      E    =     (    n  r    )      2   1  −     (    r  2    )       .
{\displaystyle E={n \choose r}2^{1-{r \choose 2}}.}
Consider what happens if this value is less than 1 .
Since the expected number of monochromatic r -subgraphs is strictly less than 1 , there exists a coloring satisfying the condition that the number of monochromatic r -subgraphs is strictly less than 1 .
The number of monochromatic r -subgraphs in this random coloring is a non-negative integer , hence it must be 0 ( 0 is the only non-negative integer less than 1 ).
It follows that if      E    =     (    n  r    )      2   1  −     (    r  2    )       <  1    {\displaystyle E={n \choose r}2^{1-{r \choose 2}}<1}    (which holds, for example, for n = 5 and r = 4 ), there must exist a coloring in which there are no monochromatic r -subgraphs.
By definition of the Ramsey number , this implies that R ( r , r ) must be bigger than n .
In particular, R ( r , r ) must grow at least exponentially with r .
A weakness of this argument is that it is entirely nonconstructive .
Even though it proves (for example) that almost every coloring of the complete graph on (1.1) r vertices contains no monochromatic r -subgraph, it gives no explicit example of such a coloring.
The problem of finding such a coloring has been open for more than 50 years.
^  The same fact can be proved without probability, using a simple counting argument: The total number of r -subgraphs is        (    n  r    )       {\displaystyle {n \choose r}}   .
Each r -subgraphs has        (    r  2    )       {\displaystyle {r \choose 2}}   edges and thus can be colored in      2     (    r  2    )        {\displaystyle 2^{r \choose 2}}   different ways.
Of these colorings, only 2 colorings are 'bad' for that subgraph (the colorings in which all vertices are red or all vertices are blue).
Hence, the total number of colorings that are bad for some (at least one) subgraph is at most     2     (    n  r    )      2      (    n  2    )     −     (    r  2    )         {\displaystyle 2{n \choose r}2^{{n \choose 2}-{r \choose 2}}}   .
Hence, if     2     (    n  r    )      2      (    n  2    )     −     (    r  2    )       <   2     (    n  2    )      ⇔     (    n  r    )      2   1  −     (    r  2    )       <  1    {\displaystyle 2{n \choose r}2^{{n \choose 2}-{r \choose 2}}<2^{n \choose 2}\Leftrightarrow {n \choose r}2^{1-{r \choose 2}}<1}   , there must be at least one coloring which is not 'bad' for any subgraph.
Second example   A 1959 paper of Erdős (see reference cited below) addressed the following problem in graph theory : given positive integers g and k , does there exist a graph G containing  only cycles of length at least g , such that the chromatic number of G is at least k ?
It can be shown that such a graph exists for any g and k , and the proof is reasonably simple.
Let n be very large and consider a random graph G on n vertices, where every edge in G exists with probability p = n 1/ g −1 .
We show that with positive probability, G satisfies the following two properties:  Property 1.
G contains at most n /2 cycles of length less than g .
Let X be the number cycles of length less than g .
The number of cycles of length i in the complete graph on n vertices is         n  !
2  ⋅  i  ⋅  (  n  −  i  )  !
≤     n   i    2      {\displaystyle {\frac {n!
}{2\cdot i\cdot (n-i)!
}}\leq {\frac {n^{i}}{2}}}    and each of them is present in G with probability p i .
Hence by Markov's inequality we have      Pr   (   X  >     n  2      )   ≤    2  n    E    ≤    1  n     ∑   i  =  3    g  −  1     p   i     n   i    =    1  n     ∑   i  =  3    g  −  1     n    i  g     ≤    g  n     n     g  −  1   g     =  g   n   −    1  g      =  o  (  1  )  .
{\displaystyle \Pr \left(X>{\tfrac {n}{2}}\right)\leq {\frac {2}{n}}E\leq {\frac {1}{n}}\sum _{i=3}^{g-1}p^{i}n^{i}={\frac {1}{n}}\sum _{i=3}^{g-1}n^{\frac {i}{g}}\leq {\frac {g}{n}}n^{\frac {g-1}{g}}=gn^{-{\frac {1}{g}}}=o(1).}
Thus for sufficiently large n , property 1 holds with a probability of more than 1/2 .
Property 2.
G contains no independent set of size     ⌈     n   2  k      ⌉    {\displaystyle \lceil {\tfrac {n}{2k}}\rceil }   .
Let Y be the size of the largest independent set in G .
Clearly, we have      Pr  (  Y  ≥  y  )  ≤     (    n  y    )     (  1  −  p   )     y  (  y  −  1  )   2     ≤   n   y     e   −     p  y  (  y  −  1  )   2      =   e   −    y  2    ⋅  (  p  y  −  2  ln  ⁡  n  −  p  )    =  o  (  1  )  ,    {\displaystyle \Pr(Y\geq y)\leq {n \choose y}(1-p)^{\frac {y(y-1)}{2}}\leq n^{y}e^{-{\frac {py(y-1)}{2}}}=e^{-{\frac {y}{2}}\cdot (py-2\ln n-p)}=o(1),}    when      y  =   ⌈    n   2  k     ⌉    .
{\displaystyle y=\left\lceil {\frac {n}{2k}}\right\rceil \!.}
Thus, for sufficiently large n , property 2 holds with a probability of more than 1/2 .
For sufficiently large n , the probability that a graph from the distribution has both properties is positive, as the events for these properties cannot be disjoint (if they were, their probabilities would sum up to more than 1).
Here comes the trick: since G has these two properties, we can remove at most n /2 vertices from G to obtain a new graph G′ on      n  ′   ≥  n   /   2    {\displaystyle n'\geq n/2}   vertices that contains only cycles of length at least g .
We can see that this new graph has no independent set of size      ⌈     n  ′   k    ⌉     {\displaystyle \left\lceil {\frac {n'}{k}}\right\rceil }   .
G′ can only be partitioned into at least k independent sets, and, hence, has chromatic number at least k .
This result gives a hint as to why the computation of the chromatic number of a graph is so difficult: even when there are no local reasons (such as small cycles) for a graph to require many colors the chromatic number can still be arbitrarily large.
Branch of mathematics concerning probability  Part of a series on statistics Probability theory  Probability  Axioms  Determinism  System  Indeterminism  Randomness   Probability space  Sample space  Event  Collectively exhaustive events  Elementary event  Mutual exclusivity  Outcome  Singleton  Experiment  Bernoulli trial  Probability distribution  Bernoulli distribution  Binomial distribution  Exponential distribution  Normal distribution  Pareto distribution  Poisson distribution  Probability measure  Random variable  Bernoulli process  Continuous or discrete  Expected value  Variance  Markov chain  Observed value  Random walk  Stochastic process   Complementary event  Joint probability  Marginal probability  Conditional probability   Independence  Conditional independence  Law of total probability  Law of large numbers  Bayes' theorem  Boole's inequality   Venn diagram  Tree diagram  v t e  Probability theory or probability calculus is the branch of mathematics concerned with probability .
Although there are several different probability interpretations , probability theory treats the concept in a rigorous mathematical manner by expressing it through a set of axioms .
Typically these axioms formalise probability in terms of a probability space , which assigns a measure taking values between 0 and 1, termed the probability measure , to a set of outcomes called the sample space .
Any specified subset of the sample space is called an event .
Central subjects in probability theory include discrete and continuous random variables , probability distributions , and stochastic processes (which provide mathematical abstractions of non-deterministic or uncertain processes or measured quantities that may either be single occurrences or evolve over time in a random fashion).
Although it is not possible to perfectly predict random events, much can be said about their behavior.
Two major results in probability theory describing such behaviour are the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem .
As a mathematical foundation for statistics , probability theory is essential to many human activities that involve quantitative analysis of data.
Methods of probability theory also apply to descriptions of complex systems given only partial knowledge of their state, as in statistical mechanics or sequential estimation .
A great discovery of twentieth-century physics was the probabilistic nature of physical phenomena at atomic scales, described in quantum mechanics .
History of probability   Main article: History of probability  The modern mathematical theory of probability has its roots in attempts to analyze games of chance by Gerolamo Cardano in the sixteenth century, and by Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal in the seventeenth century (for example the " problem of points ").
Christiaan Huygens published a book on the subject in 1657.
In the 19th century, what is considered the classical definition of probability was completed by Pierre Laplace .
Initially, probability theory mainly considered discrete events, and its methods were mainly combinatorial .
Eventually, analytical considerations compelled the incorporation of continuous variables into the theory.
This culminated in modern probability theory, on foundations laid by Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov .
Kolmogorov combined the notion of sample space , introduced by Richard von Mises , and measure theory and presented his axiom system for probability theory in 1933.
This became the mostly undisputed axiomatic basis for modern probability theory; but, alternatives exist, such as the adoption of finite rather than countable additivity by Bruno de Finetti .
Treatment   Most introductions to probability theory treat discrete probability distributions and continuous probability distributions separately.
The measure theory-based treatment of probability covers the discrete, continuous, a mix of the two, and more.
Motivation   Consider an experiment that can produce a number of outcomes.
The set of all outcomes is called the sample space of the experiment.
The power set of the sample space (or equivalently, the event space) is formed by considering all different collections of possible results.
For example, rolling an honest dice produces one of six possible results.
One collection of possible results corresponds to getting an odd number.
Thus, the subset {1,3,5} is an element of the power set of the sample space of dice rolls.
These collections are called events .
In this case, {1,3,5} is the event that the dice falls on some odd number.
If the results that actually occur fall in a given event, that event is said to have occurred.
Probability is a way of assigning every "event" a value between zero and one, with the requirement that the event made up of all possible results (in our example, the event {1,2,3,4,5,6}) be assigned a value of one.
To qualify as a probability distribution , the assignment of values must satisfy the requirement that if you look at a collection of mutually exclusive events (events that contain no common results, e.g., the events {1,6}, {3}, and {2,4} are all mutually exclusive), the probability that any of these events occurs is given by the sum of the probabilities of the events.
The probability that any one of the events {1,6}, {3}, or {2,4} will occur is 5/6.
This is the same as saying that the probability of event {1,2,3,4,6} is 5/6.
This event encompasses the possibility of any number except five being rolled.
The mutually exclusive event {5} has a probability of 1/6, and the event {1,2,3,4,5,6} has a probability of 1, that is, absolute certainty.
When doing calculations using the outcomes of an experiment, it is necessary that all those elementary events have a number assigned to them.
This is done using a random variable .
A random variable is a function that assigns to each elementary event in the sample space a real number .
This function is usually denoted by a capital letter.
In the case of a dice, the assignment of a number to certain elementary events can be done using the identity function .
This does not always work.
For example, when flipping a coin the two possible outcomes are "heads" and "tails".
In this example, the random variable X could assign to the outcome "heads" the number "0" (     X  (   heads   )  =  0    {\textstyle X({\text{heads}})=0}   ) and to the outcome "tails" the number "1" (     X  (   tails   )  =  1    {\displaystyle X({\text{tails}})=1}   ).
Discrete probability distributions   Main article: Discrete probability distribution  The Poisson distribution , a discrete probability distribution.
Discrete probability theory deals with events that occur in countable sample spaces.
Examples: Throwing dice , experiments with decks of cards , random walk , and tossing coins .
Classical definition :
Initially the probability of an event to occur was defined as the number of cases favorable for the event, over the number of total outcomes possible in an equiprobable sample space: see Classical definition of probability .
For example, if the event is "occurrence of an even number when a dice is rolled", the probability is given by        3  6     =     1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{6}}={\tfrac {1}{2}}}   , since 3 faces out of the 6 have even numbers and each face has the same probability of appearing.
Modern definition :
The modern definition starts with a finite or countable set called the sample space , which relates to the set of all possible outcomes in classical sense, denoted by     Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   .
It is then assumed that for each element     x  ∈  Ω     {\displaystyle x\in \Omega \,}   , an intrinsic "probability" value     f  (  x  )     {\displaystyle f(x)\,}   is attached, which satisfies the following properties:      f  (  x  )  ∈      for all    x  ∈  Ω   ;    {\displaystyle f(x)\in {\mbox{ for all }}x\in \Omega \,;}         ∑   x  ∈  Ω    f  (  x  )  =  1   .
{\displaystyle \sum _{x\in \Omega }f(x)=1\,.}
That is, the probability function f ( x ) lies between zero and one for every value of x in the sample space Ω , and the sum of f ( x ) over all values x in the sample space Ω is equal to 1.
An event is defined as any subset      E     {\displaystyle E\,}   of the sample space     Ω     {\displaystyle \Omega \,}   .
The probability of the event     E     {\displaystyle E\,}   is defined as      P  (  E  )  =   ∑   x  ∈  E    f  (  x  )   .
{\displaystyle P(E)=\sum _{x\in E}f(x)\,.}
So, the probability of the entire sample space is 1, and the probability of the null event is 0.
The function     f  (  x  )     {\displaystyle f(x)\,}   mapping a point in the sample space to the "probability" value is called a probability mass function abbreviated as pmf .
Continuous probability distributions   Main article: Continuous probability distribution  The normal distribution , a continuous probability distribution  Continuous probability theory deals with events that occur in a continuous sample space.
Classical definition :
The classical definition breaks down when confronted with the continuous case.
See Bertrand's paradox .
Modern definition :
If the sample space of a random variable X is the set of real numbers (      R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   ) or a subset thereof, then a function called the cumulative distribution function ( CDF )     F     {\displaystyle F\,}   exists, defined by     F  (  x  )  =  P  (  X  ≤  x  )     {\displaystyle F(x)=P(X\leq x)\,}   .
That is, F ( x ) returns the probability that X will be less than or equal to x .
The CDF necessarily satisfies the following properties.
F     {\displaystyle F\,}   is a monotonically non-decreasing , right-continuous function;       lim   x  →  −  ∞    F  (  x  )  =  0   ;    {\displaystyle \lim _{x\rightarrow -\infty }F(x)=0\,;}         lim   x  →  ∞    F  (  x  )  =  1   .
{\displaystyle \lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }F(x)=1\,.}
The random variable     X    {\displaystyle X}   is said to have a continuous probability distribution if the corresponding CDF     F    {\displaystyle F}   is continuous.
If     F     {\displaystyle F\,}   is absolutely continuous , i.e., its derivative exists and integrating the derivative gives us the CDF back again, then the random variable X is said to have a probability density function ( PDF ) or simply density      f  (  x  )  =     d  F  (  x  )    d  x      .
{\displaystyle f(x)={\frac {dF(x)}{dx}}\,.}
For a set     E  ⊆   R     {\displaystyle E\subseteq \mathbb {R} }   , the probability of the random variable X being in     E     {\displaystyle E\,}   is      P  (  X  ∈  E  )  =   ∫   x  ∈  E    d  F  (  x  )   .
{\displaystyle P(X\in E)=\int _{x\in E}dF(x)\,.}
In case the PDF exists, this can be written as      P  (  X  ∈  E  )  =   ∫   x  ∈  E    f  (  x  )   d  x   .
{\displaystyle P(X\in E)=\int _{x\in E}f(x)\,dx\,.}
Whereas the PDF exists only for continuous random variables, the CDF exists for all random variables (including discrete random variables) that take values in      R    .
{\displaystyle \mathbb {R} \,.}
These concepts can be generalized for multidimensional cases on       R    n      {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{n}}   and other continuous sample spaces.
Measure-theoretic probability theory   The utility of the measure-theoretic treatment of probability is that it unifies the discrete and the continuous cases, and makes the difference a question of which measure is used.
Furthermore, it covers distributions that are neither discrete nor continuous nor mixtures of the two.
An example of such distributions could be a mix of discrete and continuous distributions—for example, a random variable that is 0 with probability 1/2, and takes a random value from a normal distribution with probability 1/2.
It can still be studied to some extent by considering it to have a PDF of     (  δ    +  φ  (  x  )  )   /   2    {\displaystyle (\delta +\varphi (x))/2}   , where     δ      {\displaystyle \delta }   is the Dirac delta function .
Other distributions may not even be a mix, for example, the Cantor distribution has no positive probability for any single point, neither does it have a density.
The modern approach to probability theory solves these problems using measure theory to define the probability space : Given any set     Ω     {\displaystyle \Omega \,}   (also called sample space ) and a σ-algebra        F       {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}\,}   on it, a measure      P     {\displaystyle P\,}   defined on       F       {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}\,}   is called a probability measure if     P  (  Ω  )  =  1.
{\displaystyle P(\Omega )=1.\,}    If       F       {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}\,}   is the Borel σ-algebra on the set of real numbers, then there is a unique probability measure on       F       {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}\,}   for any CDF, and vice versa.
The measure corresponding to a CDF is said to be induced by the CDF.
This measure coincides with the pmf for discrete variables and PDF for continuous variables, making the measure-theoretic approach free of fallacies.
The probability of a set     E     {\displaystyle E\,}   in the σ-algebra       F       {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}\,}   is defined as      P  (  E  )  =   ∫   ω  ∈  E     μ   F    (  d  ω  )     {\displaystyle P(E)=\int _{\omega \in E}\mu _{F}(d\omega )\,}    where the integration is with respect to the measure      μ   F       {\displaystyle \mu _{F}\,}   induced by     F   .
{\displaystyle F\,.}
Along with providing better understanding and unification of discrete and continuous probabilities, measure-theoretic treatment also allows us to work on probabilities outside       R    n      {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{n}}   , as in the theory of stochastic processes .
For example, to study Brownian motion , probability is defined on a space of functions.
When it is convenient to work with a dominating measure, the Radon-Nikodym theorem is used to define a density as the Radon-Nikodym derivative of the probability distribution of interest with respect to this dominating measure.
Discrete densities are usually defined as this derivative with respect to a counting measure over the set of all possible outcomes.
Densities for absolutely continuous distributions are usually defined as this derivative with respect to the Lebesgue measure .
If a theorem can be proved in this general setting, it holds for both discrete and continuous distributions as well as others;  separate proofs are not required for discrete and continuous distributions.
Classical probability distributions   Main article: Probability distributions  Certain random variables occur very often in probability theory because they well describe many natural or physical processes.
Their distributions, therefore, have gained special importance in probability theory.
Some fundamental discrete distributions are the discrete uniform , Bernoulli , binomial , negative binomial , Poisson and geometric distributions .
Important continuous distributions include the continuous uniform , normal , exponential , gamma and beta distributions .
Convergence of random variables   Main article: Convergence of random variables  In probability theory, there are several notions of convergence for random variables .
They are listed below in the order of strength, i.e., any subsequent notion of convergence in the list implies convergence according to all of the preceding notions.
Weak convergence  A sequence of random variables      X   1    ,   X   2    ,  …  ,     {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2},\dots ,\,}   converges weakly to the random variable     X     {\displaystyle X\,}   if their respective CDF converges      F   1    ,   F   2    ,  …     {\displaystyle F_{1},F_{2},\dots \,}   converges to the CDF     F     {\displaystyle F\,}   of     X     {\displaystyle X\,}   , wherever     F     {\displaystyle F\,}   is continuous .
Weak convergence is also called convergence in distribution .
Most common shorthand notation:       X   n       →    D       X     {\displaystyle \displaystyle X_{n}\,{\xrightarrow {\mathcal {D}}}\,X}    Convergence in probability  The sequence of random variables      X   1    ,   X   2    ,  …     {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2},\dots \,}   is said to converge towards the random variable     X     {\displaystyle X\,}    in probability if      lim   n  →  ∞    P   (    |    X   n    −  X   |   ≥  ε   )   =  0    {\displaystyle \lim _{n\rightarrow \infty }P\left(\left|X_{n}-X\right|\geq \varepsilon \right)=0}   for every ε > 0.
Most common shorthand notation:       X   n       →   P      X     {\displaystyle \displaystyle X_{n}\,{\xrightarrow {P}}\,X}    Strong convergence  The sequence of random variables      X   1    ,   X   2    ,  …     {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2},\dots \,}   is said to converge towards the random variable     X     {\displaystyle X\,}    strongly if     P  (   lim   n  →  ∞     X   n    =  X  )  =  1    {\displaystyle P(\lim _{n\rightarrow \infty }X_{n}=X)=1}   .
Strong convergence is also known as almost sure convergence .
Most common shorthand notation:       X   n       →    a  .
s  .
X     {\displaystyle \displaystyle X_{n}\,{\xrightarrow {\mathrm {a.s.} }}\,X}    As the names indicate, weak convergence is weaker than strong convergence.
In fact, strong convergence implies convergence in probability, and convergence in probability implies weak convergence.
The reverse statements are not always true.
Law of large numbers   Main article: Law of large numbers  Common intuition suggests that if a fair coin is tossed many times, then roughly half of the time it will turn up heads , and the other half it will turn up tails .
Furthermore, the more often the coin is tossed, the more likely it should be that the ratio of the number of heads to the number of tails will approach unity.
Modern probability theory provides a formal version of this intuitive idea, known as the law of large numbers .
This law is remarkable because it is not assumed in the foundations of probability theory, but instead emerges from these foundations as a theorem.
Since it links theoretically derived probabilities to their actual frequency of occurrence in the real world, the law of large numbers is considered as a pillar in the history of statistical theory and has had widespread influence.
The law of large numbers (LLN) states that the sample average         X  ¯     n    =    1  n      ∑   k  =  1    n     X   k       {\displaystyle {\overline {X}}_{n}={\frac {1}{n}}{\sum _{k=1}^{n}X_{k}}}    of a sequence of independent and identically distributed random variables       X   k      {\displaystyle X_{k}}   converges towards their common expectation (expected value)     μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   , provided that the expectation of      |    X   k     |     {\displaystyle |X_{k}|}   is finite.
It is in the different forms of convergence of random variables that separates the weak and the strong law of large numbers    Weak law:         X  ¯     n       →   P      μ     {\displaystyle \displaystyle {\overline {X}}_{n}\,{\xrightarrow {P}}\,\mu }   for     n  →  ∞    {\displaystyle n\to \infty }    Strong law:         X  ¯     n       →    a  .
μ     {\displaystyle \displaystyle {\overline {X}}_{n}\,{\xrightarrow {\mathrm {a.\,s.}
}}\,\mu }   for     n  →  ∞  .
{\displaystyle n\to \infty .}
It follows from the LLN that if an event of probability p is observed repeatedly during independent experiments, the ratio of the observed frequency of that event to the total number of repetitions converges towards p .
For example, if      Y   1    ,   Y   2    ,  .
{\displaystyle Y_{1},Y_{2},...\,}   are independent Bernoulli random variables taking values 1 with probability p and 0 with probability 1- p , then       E    (   Y   i    )  =  p    {\displaystyle {\textrm {E}}(Y_{i})=p}   for all i , so that         Y  ¯      n      {\displaystyle {\bar {Y}}_{n}}   converges to p  almost surely .
Central limit theorem   Main article: Central limit theorem  The central limit theorem (CLT) explains the ubiquitous occurrence of the normal distribution in nature, and this theorem, according to David Williams, "is one of the great results of mathematics."
The theorem states that the average of many independent and identically distributed random variables with finite variance tends towards a normal distribution irrespective of the distribution followed by the original random variables.
Formally, let      X   1    ,   X   2    ,  …     {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2},\dots \,}   be independent random variables with mean      μ    {\displaystyle \mu }   and variance       σ   2    >  0.
{\displaystyle \sigma ^{2}>0.\,}   Then the sequence of random variables       Z   n    =      ∑   i  =  1    n    (   X   i    −  μ  )    σ    n          {\displaystyle Z_{n}={\frac {\sum _{i=1}^{n}(X_{i}-\mu )}{\sigma {\sqrt {n}}}}\,}    converges in distribution to a standard normal random variable.
For some classes of random variables, the classic central limit theorem works rather fast, as illustrated in the Berry–Esseen theorem .
For example, the distributions with finite  first, second, and third moment from the exponential family ; on the other hand, for some random variables of the heavy tail and fat tail variety, it works very slowly or may not work at all: in such cases one may use the Generalized Central Limit Theorem (GCLT).
Theorem which asserts the existence of an object  Geometrical proof that an irrational number exists: If the isosceles right triangle ABC had integer side lengths, so had the strictly smaller triangle A'B'C.
Repeating this construction would obtain an infinitely descending sequence of integer side lengths.
In mathematics , an existence theorem is a theorem which asserts the existence of a certain object.
It might be a statement which begins with the phrase " there exist(s) ", or it might be a universal statement whose last quantifier is existential (e.g., "for all x , y , ...
there exist(s) ...").
In the formal terms of symbolic logic , an existence theorem is a theorem with a prenex normal form involving the existential quantifier , even though in practice, such theorems are usually stated in standard mathematical language.
For example, the statement that the sine function is continuous everywhere, or any theorem written in big O notation , can be considered as theorems which are existential by nature—since the quantification can be found in the definitions of the concepts used.
A controversy that goes back to the early twentieth century concerns the issue of purely theoretic existence theorems, that is, theorems which depend on non-constructive foundational material such as the axiom of infinity , the axiom of choice or the law of excluded middle .
Such theorems provide no indication as to how to construct (or exhibit) the object whose existence is being claimed.
From a constructivist viewpoint, such approaches are not viable as it lends to mathematics losing its concrete applicability,  while the opposing viewpoint is that abstract methods are far-reaching,  in a way that numerical analysis cannot be.
'Pure' existence results   In mathematics, an existence theorem is purely theoretical if the proof given for it does not indicate a construction of the object whose existence is asserted.
Such a proof is non-constructive,  since the whole approach may not lend itself to construction.
In terms of algorithms , purely theoretical existence theorems bypass all algorithms for finding what is asserted to exist.
These are to be contrasted with the so-called "constructive" existence theorems,  which many constructivist mathematicians working in extended logics (such as intuitionistic logic ) believe to be intrinsically stronger than their non-constructive counterparts.
Despite that, the purely theoretical existence results are nevertheless ubiquitous in contemporary mathematics.
For example, John Nash 's original proof of the existence of a Nash equilibrium in 1951 was such an existence theorem.
An approach which is constructive was also later found in 1962.
Constructivist ideas   From the other direction, there has been considerable clarification of what constructive mathematics is—without the emergence of a 'master theory'.
For example, according to Errett Bishop 's definitions, the continuity of a function such as sin( x ) should be proved as a constructive bound on the modulus of continuity , meaning that the existential content of the assertion of continuity is a promise that can always be kept.
Accordingly, Bishop rejects the standard idea of pointwise continuity, and proposed that continuity should be defined in terms of "local uniform continuity".
One could get another explanation of existence theorem from type theory , in which a proof of an existential statement can come only from a term (which one can see as the computational content).
Open problem on 3x+1 and x/2 functions      Unsolved problem in mathematics :  For even numbers, divide by 2; For odd numbers, multiply by 3 and add 1.
With enough repetition, do all positive integers converge to 1?
(more unsolved problems in mathematics)   Directed graph showing the orbits of small numbers under the Collatz map, skipping even numbers.
The Collatz conjecture states that all paths eventually lead to 1.
The Collatz conjecture  is one of the most famous unsolved problems in mathematics .
The conjecture asks whether repeating two simple arithmetic operations will eventually transform every positive integer into 1.
It concerns sequences of integers in which each term is obtained from the previous term as follows: if the previous term is even , the next term is one half of the previous term.
If the previous term is odd, the next term is 3 times the previous term plus 1.
The conjecture is that these sequences always reach 1, no matter which positive integer is chosen to start the sequence.
The conjecture has been shown to hold for all positive integers up to 2.95 × 10 20 , but no general proof has been found.
It is named after the mathematician Lothar Collatz , who introduced the idea in 1937, two years after receiving his doctorate.
The sequence of numbers involved is sometimes referred to as the hailstone sequence, hailstone numbers or hailstone numerals (because the values are usually subject to multiple descents and ascents like hailstones in a cloud),  or as wondrous numbers.
Paul Erdős said about the Collatz conjecture: "Mathematics may not be ready for such problems."
Jeffrey Lagarias stated in 2010 that the Collatz conjecture "is an extraordinarily difficult problem, completely out of reach of present day mathematics".
Statement of the problem  Numbers from 1 to 9999 and their corresponding total stopping time  Histogram of total stopping times for the numbers 1 to 10 8 .
Total stopping time is on the x axis, frequency on the y axis.
Histogram of total stopping times for the numbers 1 to 10 9 .
Iteration time for inputs of 2 to 10 7 .
Total stopping time of numbers up to 250, 1000, 4000, 20000, 100000, 500000  Consider the following operation on an arbitrary positive integer :  If the number is even, divide it by two.
If the number is odd, triple it and add one.
In modular arithmetic notation, define the function  f as follows:     f  (  n  )  =    {     n   /   2     if   n  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )   ,      3  n  +  1     if   n  ≡  1    (  mod   2  )   .
{\displaystyle f(n)={\begin{cases}n/2&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0{\pmod {2}},\\3n+1&{\text{if }}n\equiv 1{\pmod {2}}.\end{cases}}}    Now form a sequence by performing this operation repeatedly, beginning with any positive integer, and taking the result at each step as the input at the next.
In notation:      a   i    =    {     n     for   i  =  0  ,      f  (   a   i  −  1    )     for   i  >  0          {\displaystyle a_{i}={\begin{cases}n&{\text{for }}i=0,\\f(a_{i-1})&{\text{for }}i>0\end{cases}}}   (that is: a i is the value of f applied to n recursively i times; a i = f  i ( n ) ).
The Collatz conjecture is: This process will eventually reach the number 1, regardless of which positive integer is chosen initially.
That is, for each      n    {\displaystyle n}   , there is some     i    {\displaystyle i}   with      a   i    =  1    {\displaystyle a_{i}=1}   .
If the conjecture is false, it can only be because there is some starting number which gives rise to a sequence that does not contain 1.
Such a sequence would either enter a repeating cycle that excludes 1, or increase without bound.
No such sequence has been found.
The smallest i such that a i < a 0  is called the stopping time of n .
Similarly, the smallest k such that a k = 1 is called the total stopping time of n .
If one of the indexes i or k doesn't exist, we say that the stopping time or the total stopping time, respectively, is infinite.
The Collatz conjecture asserts that the total stopping time of every n is finite.
It is also equivalent to saying that every n ≥ 2 has a finite stopping time.
Since 3 n + 1 is even whenever n is odd, one may instead use the "shortcut" form of the Collatz function:     f  (  n  )  =    {       n  2       if   n  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )   ,         3  n  +  1   2       if   n  ≡  1    (  mod   2  )   .
{\displaystyle f(n)={\begin{cases}{\frac {n}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0{\pmod {2}},\\{\frac {3n+1}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 1{\pmod {2}}.\end{cases}}}   This definition yields smaller values for the stopping time and total stopping time without changing the overall dynamics of the process.
Empirical data  For instance, starting with n = 12 and applying the function f without "shortcut", one gets the sequence 12, 6, 3, 10, 5, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1.
The number n = 19 takes longer to reach 1: 19, 58, 29, 88, 44, 22, 11, 34, 17, 52, 26, 13, 40, 20, 10, 5, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1.
The sequence for n = 27 , listed and graphed below, takes 111 steps (41 steps through odd numbers, in bold), climbing as high as 9232 before descending to 1.
27 , 82, 41 , 124, 62, 31 , 94, 47 , 142, 71 , 214, 107 , 322, 161 , 484, 242, 121 , 364, 182, 91 , 274, 137 , 412, 206, 103 , 310, 155 , 466, 233 , 700, 350, 175 , 526, 263 , 790, 395 , 1186, 593 , 1780, 890, 445 , 1336, 668, 334, 167 , 502, 251 , 754, 377 , 1132, 566, 283 , 850, 425 , 1276, 638, 319 , 958, 479 , 1438, 719 , 2158, 1079 , 3238, 1619 , 4858, 2429 , 7288, 3644, 1822, 911 , 2734, 1367 , 4102, 2051 , 6154, 3077 , 9232, 4616, 2308, 1154, 577 , 1732, 866, 433 , 1300, 650, 325 , 976, 488, 244, 122, 61 , 184, 92, 46, 23 , 70, 35 , 106, 53 , 160, 80, 40, 20, 10, 5 , 16, 8, 4, 2, 1 (sequence A008884 in the OEIS )   Numbers with a total stopping time longer than that of any smaller starting value form a sequence beginning with:  1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 18, 25, 27, 54, 73, 97, 129, 171, 231, 313, 327, 649, 703, 871, 1161, 2223, 2463, 2919, 3711, 6171, ...
(sequence A006877 in the OEIS ).
The starting values whose maximum trajectory point is greater than that of any smaller starting value are as follows:  1, 2, 3, 7, 15, 27, 255, 447, 639, 703, 1819, 4255, 4591, 9663, 20895, 26623, 31911, 60975, 77671, 113383, 138367, 159487, 270271, 665215, 704511, ...
(sequence A006884 in the OEIS )  Number of steps for n to reach 1 are  0, 1, 7, 2, 5, 8, 16, 3, 19, 6, 14, 9, 9, 17, 17, 4, 12, 20, 20, 7, 7, 15, 15, 10, 23, 10, 111, 18, 18, 18, 106, 5, 26, 13, 13, 21, 21, 21, 34, 8, 109, 8, 29, 16, 16, 16, 104, 11, 24, 24, ...
(sequence A006577 in the OEIS )  The starting value having the largest total stopping time while being  less than 10 is 9, which has 19 steps,  less than 100 is 97, which has 118 steps,  less than 1000 is 871, which has 178 steps,  less than 10 4 is 6171, which has 261 steps,  less than 10 5 is 77 031 , which has 350 steps,  less than 10 6 is 837 799 , which has 524 steps,  less than 10 7 is 8 400 511 , which has 685 steps,  less than 10 8 is 63 728 127 , which has 949 steps,  less than 10 9 is 670 617 279 , which has 986 steps,  less than 10 10 is 9 780 657 630 , which has 1132 steps,   less than 10 11 is 75 128 138 247 , which has 1228 steps,  less than 10 12 is 989 345 275 647 , which has 1348 steps.
(sequence A284668 in the OEIS )  These numbers are the lowest ones with the indicated step count, but not necessarily the only ones below the given limit.
As an example, 9 780 657 631 has 1132 steps, as does 9 780 657 630 .
The starting values having the smallest total stopping time with respect to their number of digits (in base 2) are the powers of two since 2 n is halved n times to reach 1, and is never increased.
Visualizations     Directed graph showing the orbits of the first 1000 numbers.
The x axis represents starting number, the y axis represents the highest number reached during the chain to 1.
This plot shows a restricted y axis: some x values produce intermediates as high as 2.7 × 10 7 (for x = 9663 )     The same plot as the previous one but on log scale, so all y values are shown.
The first thick line towards the middle of the plot corresponds to the tip at 27, which reaches a maximum at 9232.
The tree of all the numbers having fewer than 20 steps.
The number of iterations it takes to get to one for the first 100 million numbers.
Supporting arguments  Although the conjecture has not been proven, most mathematicians who have looked into the problem think the conjecture is true because experimental evidence and heuristic arguments support it.
Experimental evidence  As of 2020  , the conjecture has been checked by computer for all starting values up to 2 68 ≈ 2.95 × 10 20 .
All values tested so far converge to 1.
This computer evidence is still not rigorous proof that the conjecture is true for all starting values, as counterexamples may be found when considering very large (or possibly immense) positive integers, as in the case of the disproven Pólya conjecture and Mertens conjecture .
However, such verifications may have other implications.
For example, one can derive additional constraints on the period and structural form of a non-trivial cycle .
A probabilistic heuristic  If one considers only the odd numbers in the sequence generated by the Collatz process, then each odd number is on average 3 / 4 of the previous one.
(More precisely, the geometric mean of the ratios of outcomes is 3 / 4 .)
This yields a heuristic argument that every Hailstone sequence should decrease in the long run, although this is not evidence against other cycles, only against divergence.
The argument is not a proof because it assumes that Hailstone sequences are assembled from uncorrelated probabilistic events.
(It does rigorously establish that the 2-adic extension of the Collatz process has two division steps for every multiplication step for almost all 2-adic starting values.)
Stopping times  As proven by Riho Terras , almost every positive integer has a finite stopping time.
In other words, almost every Collatz sequence reaches a point that is strictly below its initial value.
The proof is based on the distribution of parity vectors and uses the central limit theorem .
In 2019, Terence Tao improved this result by showing, using logarithmic density , that almost all (in the sense of logarithmic density) Collatz orbits are descending below any given function of the starting point, provided that this function diverges to infinity, no matter how slowly.
Responding to this work, Quanta Magazine wrote that Tao "came away with one of the most significant results on the Collatz conjecture in decades".
Lower bounds  In a computer-aided proof , Krasikov and Lagarias showed that the number of integers in the interval  that eventually reach 1 is at least equal to x 0.84 for all sufficiently large x .
Cycles  In this part, consider the shortcut form of the Collatz function     f  (  n  )  =    {       n  2       if   n  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )   ,         3  n  +  1   2       if   n  ≡  1    (  mod   2  )   .
{\displaystyle f(n)={\begin{cases}{\frac {n}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0{\pmod {2}},\\{\frac {3n+1}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 1{\pmod {2}}.\end{cases}}}   A cycle is a sequence ( a 0 , a 1 , ..., a q ) of distinct positive integers where f ( a 0 ) = a 1 , f ( a 1 ) = a 2 , ..., and f ( a q ) = a 0 .
The only known cycle is (1,2) of period 2, called the trivial cycle.
Cycle length  The length of a non-trivial cycle is known to be at least 186 265 759 595 .
If it can be shown that for all positive integers less than     3  ×   2   69      {\displaystyle 3\times 2^{69}}   the Collatz sequences reach 1, then this bound would raise to 355 504 839 929 .
In fact, Eliahou (1993) proved that the period p of any non-trivial cycle is of the form     p  =  301994  a  +  17087915  b  +  85137581  c    {\displaystyle p=301994a+17087915b+85137581c}   where a , b and c are non-negative integers, b ≥ 1 and ac = 0 .
This result is based on the continued fraction expansion of ln 3 / ln 2 .
k -cycles  A k -cycle is a cycle that can be partitioned into k contiguous subsequences, each consisting of an increasing sequence of  odd numbers, followed by a decreasing sequence of even numbers.
For instance, if the cycle consists of a single increasing sequence of odd numbers followed by a decreasing sequence of even numbers, it is called a 1-cycle .
Steiner (1977) proved that there is no 1-cycle other than the trivial (1; 2) .
Simons (2005) used Steiner's method to prove that there is no 2-cycle.
Simons & de Weger (2005) extended this proof up to 68-cycles; there is no k -cycle up to k = 68 .
Hercher extended the method further and proved that there exists no k -cycle with k ≤91 .
As exhaustive computer searches continue, larger k values may be ruled out.
To state the argument more intuitively; we do not have to search for cycles that have less than 92 subsequences, where each subsequence consists of consecutive ups followed by consecutive downs.
Other formulations of the conjecture  In reverse  The first 21 levels of the Collatz graph generated in bottom-up fashion.
The graph includes all numbers with an orbit length of 21 or less.
There is another approach to prove the conjecture, which considers the bottom-up
method of growing the so-called Collatz graph .
The Collatz graph is a graph defined by the inverse relation      R  (  n  )  =    {     {  2  n  }     if   n  ≡  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  5       {   2  n  ,     n  −  1   3     }      if   n  ≡  4          (  mod   6  )   .
{\displaystyle R(n)={\begin{cases}\{2n\}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0,1,2,3,5\\\left\{2n,{\frac {n-1}{3}}\right\}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 4\end{cases}}{\pmod {6}}.}
So, instead of proving that all positive integers eventually lead to 1, we can try to prove that 1 leads backwards to all positive integers.
For any integer n , n ≡ 1 (mod 2)  if and only if  3 n + 1 ≡ 4 (mod 6) .
Equivalently, n − 1 / 3 ≡ 1 (mod 2) if and only if n ≡ 4 (mod 6) .
Conjecturally, this inverse relation forms a tree except for the 1–2–4 loop (the inverse of the 4–2–1 loop of the unaltered function f defined in the Statement of the problem section of this article).
When the relation 3 n + 1 of the function f is replaced by the common substitute "shortcut" relation 3 n + 1 / 2 , the Collatz graph is defined by the inverse relation,     R  (  n  )  =    {     {  2  n  }     if   n  ≡  0  ,  1       {   2  n  ,     2  n  −  1   3     }      if   n  ≡  2          (  mod   3  )   .
{\displaystyle R(n)={\begin{cases}\{2n\}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0,1\\\left\{2n,{\frac {2n-1}{3}}\right\}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 2\end{cases}}{\pmod {3}}.}
For any integer n , n ≡ 1 (mod 2) if and only if 3 n + 1 / 2 ≡ 2 (mod 3) .
Equivalently, 2 n − 1 / 3 ≡ 1 (mod 2) if and only if n ≡ 2 (mod 3) .
Conjecturally, this inverse relation forms a tree except for a 1–2 loop (the inverse of the 1–2 loop of the function f(n) revised as indicated above).
Alternatively, replace the 3 n + 1 with n ′ / H ( n ′ ) where n ′ = 3 n + 1 and H ( n ′ ) is the highest power of 2 that divides n ′ (with no remainder ).
The resulting function f maps from odd numbers to odd numbers.
Now suppose that for some odd number n , applying this operation k times yields the number 1 (that is, f k ( n ) = 1 ).
Then in binary , the number n can be written as the concatenation of strings  w k  w k −1 ...
w 1 where each w h is a finite and contiguous extract from the representation of 1 / 3 h .
The representation of n therefore holds the repetends of 1 / 3 h , where each repetend is optionally rotated and then replicated up to a finite number of bits.
It is only in binary that this occurs.
Conjecturally, every binary string s that ends with a '1' can be reached by a representation of this form (where we may add or delete leading '0's to s ).
As an abstract machine that computes in base two  Repeated applications of the Collatz function can be represented as an abstract machine that handles strings of bits .
The machine will perform the following three steps on any odd number until only one 1 remains:  Append 1 to the (right) end of the number in binary (giving 2 n + 1 );  Add this to the original number by binary addition (giving 2 n + 1 + n = 3 n + 1 );  Remove all trailing 0 s (that is, repeatedly divide by 2 until the result is odd).
Example  The starting number 7 is written in base two as 111 .
The resulting Collatz sequence is:   111 111 1 1011 0  1011 1 10001 0  10001 1 1101 00  1101 1 101 000  101 1 1 0000    As a parity sequence  For this section, consider the Collatz function  in the slightly modified form     f  (  n  )  =    {       n  2       if   n  ≡  0         3  n  +  1   2       if   n  ≡  1          (  mod   2  )   .
{\displaystyle f(n)={\begin{cases}{\frac {n}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0\\{\frac {3n+1}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 1\end{cases}}{\pmod {2}}.}
This can be done because when n is odd, 3 n + 1 is always even.
If P(...) is the parity of a number, that is P(2 n ) = 0 and P(2 n + 1) = 1 , then we can define the Collatz parity sequence (or parity vector) for a number n as p i = P( a i ) , where a 0 = n , and a i +1 = f ( a i ) .
Which operation is performed, 3 n + 1 / 2 or n / 2 , depends on the parity.
The parity sequence is the same as the sequence of operations.
Using this form for f ( n ) , it can be shown that the parity sequences for two numbers m and n will agree in the first k terms if and only if m and n are equivalent modulo 2 k .
This implies that every number is uniquely identified by its parity sequence, and moreover that if there are multiple Hailstone cycles, then their corresponding parity cycles must be different.
Applying the f function k times to the number n = 2 k a + b will give the result 3 c a + d , where d is the result of applying the f function k times to b , and c is how many increases were encountered during that sequence.
For example, for 2 5 a + 1 there are 3 increases as 1 iterates to 2, 1, 2, 1, and finally to 2 so the result is 3 3 a + 2 ; for 2 2 a + 1 there is only 1 increase as 1 rises to 2 and falls to 1 so the result is 3 a + 1 .
When b is 2 k − 1 then there will be k rises and the result will be 3 k a + 3 k − 1 .
The power of 3 multiplying a is independent of the value of a ; it depends only on the behavior of b .
This allows one to predict that certain forms of numbers will always lead to a smaller number after a certain number of iterations: for example, 4 a + 1 becomes 3 a + 1 after two applications of f and 16 a + 3 becomes 9 a + 2 after four applications of f .
Whether those smaller numbers continue to 1, however, depends on the value of a .
As a tag system  For the Collatz function in the form     f  (  n  )  =    {       n  2       if   n  ≡  0         3  n  +  1   2       if   n  ≡  1.
(  mod   2  )     {\displaystyle f(n)={\begin{cases}{\frac {n}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 0\\{\frac {3n+1}{2}}&{\text{if }}n\equiv 1.\end{cases}}{\pmod {2}}}    Hailstone sequences can be computed by the 2-tag system with production rules  a → bc , b → a , c → aaa .
In this system, the positive integer n is represented by a string of n copies of a , and iteration of the tag operation halts on any word of length less than 2.
(Adapted from De Mol.)
The Collatz conjecture equivalently states that this tag system, with an arbitrary finite string of a as the initial word, eventually halts (see Tag system for a worked example).
Extensions to larger domains  Iterating on all integers  An extension to the Collatz conjecture is to include all integers, not just positive integers.
Leaving aside the cycle 0 → 0 which cannot be entered from outside, there are a total of four known cycles, which all nonzero integers seem to eventually fall into under iteration of f .
These cycles are listed here, starting with the well-known cycle for positive n : Odd values are listed in large bold.
Each cycle is listed with its member of least absolute value (which is always odd) first.
Cycle  Odd-value cycle length  Full cycle length   1 → 4 → 2 → 1  ...
 1  3   −1 → −2 → −1  ...
 1  2   −5 → −14 → −7 → −20 → −10 → −5  ...
 2  5   −17 → −50 → −25 → −74 → −37 → −110 → −55 → −164 → −82 → −41 → −122 → −61 → −182 → −91 → −272 → −136 → −68 → −34 → −17  ...
 7  18  The generalized Collatz conjecture is the assertion that every integer, under iteration by f , eventually falls into one of the four cycles above or the cycle 0 → 0.
(The 0 → 0 cycle is only included for the sake of completeness.)
Iterating on rationals with odd denominators  The Collatz map can be extended to (positive or negative) rational numbers which have odd denominators when written in lowest terms.
The number is taken to be 'odd' or 'even' according to whether its numerator is odd or even.
Then the formula for the map is exactly the same as when the domain is the integers: an 'even' such rational is divided by 2; an 'odd' such rational is multiplied by 3 and then 1 is added.
A closely related fact is that the Collatz map extends to the ring of 2-adic integers , which contains the ring of rationals with odd denominators as a subring.
When using the "shortcut" definition of the Collatz map, it is known that any periodic parity sequence is generated by exactly one rational.
Conversely, it is conjectured that every rational with an odd denominator has an eventually cyclic parity sequence (Periodicity Conjecture  ).
If a parity cycle has length n and includes odd numbers exactly m times at indices k 0 < ⋯ < k m −1 , then the unique rational which generates immediately and periodically this parity cycle is            3   m  −  1     2    k   0      +  ⋯  +   3   0     2    k   m  −  1         2   n    −   3   m       .
{\displaystyle {\frac {3^{m-1}2^{k_{0}}+\cdots +3^{0}2^{k_{m-1}}}{2^{n}-3^{m}}}.}
( 1 )   For example, the parity cycle (1 0 1 1 0 0 1) has length 7 and four odd terms at indices 0, 2, 3, and 6.
It is repeatedly generated by the fraction         3   3     2   0    +   3   2     2   2    +   3   1     2   3    +   3   0     2   6       2   7    −   3   4       =    151  47      {\displaystyle {\frac {3^{3}2^{0}+3^{2}2^{2}+3^{1}2^{3}+3^{0}2^{6}}{2^{7}-3^{4}}}={\frac {151}{47}}}   as the latter leads to the rational cycle       151  47    →    250  47    →    125  47    →    211  47    →    340  47    →    170  47    →    85  47    →    151  47    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {151}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {250}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {125}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {211}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {340}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {170}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {85}{47}}\rightarrow {\frac {151}{47}}.}
Any cyclic permutation of (1 0 1 1 0 0 1) is associated to one of the above fractions.
For instance, the cycle (0 1 1 0 0 1 1) is produced by the fraction         3   3     2   1    +   3   2     2   2    +   3   1     2   5    +   3   0     2   6       2   7    −   3   4       =    250  47    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {3^{3}2^{1}+3^{2}2^{2}+3^{1}2^{5}+3^{0}2^{6}}{2^{7}-3^{4}}}={\frac {250}{47}}.}
For a one-to-one correspondence, a parity cycle should be irreducible , that is, not partitionable into identical sub-cycles.
As an illustration of this, the parity cycle (1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0) and its sub-cycle (1 1 0 0) are associated to the same fraction 5 / 7 when reduced to lowest terms.
In this context, assuming the validity of the Collatz conjecture implies that (1 0) and (0 1) are the only parity cycles generated by positive whole numbers (1 and 2, respectively).
If the odd denominator d of a rational is not a multiple of 3, then all the iterates have the same denominator and the sequence of numerators can be obtained by applying the " 3 n + d " generalization  of the Collatz function      T   d    (  x  )  =    {       x  2       if   x  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )   ,         3  x  +  d   2       if   x  ≡  1    (  mod   2  )   .
{\displaystyle T_{d}(x)={\begin{cases}{\frac {x}{2}}&{\text{if }}x\equiv 0{\pmod {2}},\\{\frac {3x+d}{2}}&{\text{if }}x\equiv 1{\pmod {2}}.\end{cases}}}     2-adic extension  The function     T  (  x  )  =    {       x  2       if   x  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )          3  x  +  1   2       if   x  ≡  1    (  mod   2  )           {\displaystyle T(x)={\begin{cases}{\frac {x}{2}}&{\text{if }}x\equiv 0{\pmod {2}}\\{\frac {3x+1}{2}}&{\text{if }}x\equiv 1{\pmod {2}}\end{cases}}}   is well-defined on the ring       Z    2      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} _{2}}   of 2-adic integers , where it is continuous and measure-preserving with respect to the 2-adic measure.
Moreover, its dynamics is known to be ergodic .
Define the parity vector function Q acting on       Z    2      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} _{2}}   as     Q  (  x  )  =   ∑   k  =  0    ∞     (    T   k    (  x  )   mod    2   )    2   k    .
{\displaystyle Q(x)=\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }\left(T^{k}(x)\mod 2\right)2^{k}.}
The function Q is a 2-adic isometry .
Consequently, every infinite parity sequence occurs for exactly one 2-adic integer, so that almost all trajectories are acyclic in       Z    2      {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} _{2}}   .
An equivalent formulation of the Collatz conjecture is that     Q   (    Z    +    )   ⊂     1  3      Z   .
{\displaystyle Q\left(\mathbb {Z} ^{+}\right)\subset {\tfrac {1}{3}}\mathbb {Z} .}
Iterating on real or complex numbers  Cobweb plot of the orbit 10 → 5 → 8 → 4 → 2 → 1 → ...
in an extension of the Collatz map to the real line.
The Collatz map can be extended to the real line by choosing any function which evaluates to     x   /   2    {\displaystyle x/2}   when     x    {\displaystyle x}   is an even integer, and to either     3  x  +  1    {\displaystyle 3x+1}   or     (  3  x  +  1  )   /   2    {\displaystyle (3x+1)/2}   (for the "shortcut" version) when     x    {\displaystyle x}   is an odd integer.
This is called an interpolating function.
A simple way to do this is to pick two functions      g   1      {\displaystyle g_{1}}   and      g   2      {\displaystyle g_{2}}   , where:       g   1    (  n  )  =    {     1  ,    n   is even,       0  ,    n   is odd,           {\displaystyle g_{1}(n)={\begin{cases}1,&n{\text{ is even,}}\\0,&n{\text{ is odd,}}\end{cases}}}         g   2    (  n  )  =    {     0  ,    n   is even,       1  ,    n   is odd,           {\displaystyle g_{2}(n)={\begin{cases}0,&n{\text{ is even,}}\\1,&n{\text{ is odd,}}\end{cases}}}    and use them as switches for our desired values:      f  (  x  )  ≜    x  2    ⋅   g   1    (  x  )   +      3  x  +  1   2    ⋅   g   2    (  x  )    {\displaystyle f(x)\triangleq {\frac {x}{2}}\cdot g_{1}(x)\,+\,{\frac {3x+1}{2}}\cdot g_{2}(x)}   .
One such choice is      g   1    (  x  )  ≜   cos   2    ⁡   (      π  2     x   )     {\displaystyle g_{1}(x)\triangleq \cos ^{2}\left({\tfrac {\pi }{2}}x\right)}   and      g   2    (  x  )  ≜   sin   2    ⁡   (      π  2     x   )     {\displaystyle g_{2}(x)\triangleq \sin ^{2}\left({\tfrac {\pi }{2}}x\right)}   .
The iterations of this map lead to a dynamical system , further investigated by Marc Chamberland.
He showed that the conjecture does not hold for positive real numbers since there are infinitely many fixed points , as well as orbits escaping monotonically to infinity.
The function     f    {\displaystyle f}   has two attracting cycles of period     2    {\displaystyle 2}   :     (  1  ;   2  )    {\displaystyle (1;\,2)}   and     (  1.1925...
 ;   2.1386...
 )    {\displaystyle (1.1925...;\,2.1386...)}   .
Moreover, the set of unbounded orbits is conjectured to be of measure      0    {\displaystyle 0}   .
Letherman, Schleicher, and Wood extended the study to the complex plane .
They used Chamberland's function for complex sine and cosine and added the extra term        1  π      (      1  2     −  cos  ⁡  (  π  z  )   )   sin  ⁡  (  π  z  )   +    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{\pi }}\left({\tfrac {1}{2}}-\cos(\pi z)\right)\sin(\pi z)\,+}        h  (  z  )   sin   2    ⁡  (  π  z  )    {\displaystyle h(z)\sin ^{2}(\pi z)}   , where     h  (  z  )    {\displaystyle h(z)}   is any entire function .
Since this expression evaluates to zero for real integers, the extended function          f  (  z  )  ≜       z  2     cos   2    ⁡   (     π  2    z   )   +     3  z  +  1   2     sin   2    ⁡   (     π  2    z   )    +         1  π     (     1  2    −  cos  ⁡  (  π  z  )   )   sin  ⁡  (  π  z  )  +  h  (  z  )   sin   2    ⁡  (  π  z  )        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}f(z)\triangleq \;&{\frac {z}{2}}\cos ^{2}\left({\frac {\pi }{2}}z\right)+{\frac {3z+1}{2}}\sin ^{2}\left({\frac {\pi }{2}}z\right)\,+\\&{\frac {1}{\pi }}\left({\frac {1}{2}}-\cos(\pi z)\right)\sin(\pi z)+h(z)\sin ^{2}(\pi z)\end{aligned}}}    is an interpolation of the Collatz map to the complex plane.
The reason for adding the extra term is to make all integers critical points of     f    {\displaystyle f}   .
With this, they show that no integer is in a Baker domain , which implies that any integer is either eventually periodic or belongs to a wandering domain .
They conjectured that the latter is not the case, which would make all integer orbits finite.
A Collatz fractal centered at the origin, with real parts from -5 to 5.
Most of the points have orbits that diverge to infinity.
Coloring these points based on how fast they diverge produces the image on the left, for     h  (  z  )  ≜  0    {\displaystyle h(z)\triangleq 0}   .
The inner black regions and the outer region are the Fatou components , and the boundary between them is the Julia set of     f    {\displaystyle f}   , which forms a fractal pattern, sometimes called a "Collatz fractal".
Julia set of the exponential interpolation.
There are many other ways to define a complex interpolating function, such as using the complex exponential instead of sine and cosine:      f  (  z  )  ≜    z  2    +    1  4    (  2  z  +  1  )   (   1  −   e   i  π  z     )     {\displaystyle f(z)\triangleq {\frac {z}{2}}+{\frac {1}{4}}(2z+1)\left(1-e^{i\pi z}\right)}   ,  which exhibit different dynamics.
In this case, for instance, if     Im  ⁡  (  z  )  ≫  1    {\displaystyle \operatorname {Im} (z)\gg 1}   , then     f  (  z  )  ≈  z  +     1  4       {\displaystyle f(z)\approx z+{\tfrac {1}{4}}}   .
The corresponding Julia set, shown on the right, consists of uncountably many curves, called hairs , or rays .
Optimizations  Time–space tradeoff  The section As a parity sequence above gives a way to speed up simulation of the sequence.
To jump ahead k steps on each iteration (using the f function from that section), break up the current number into two parts, b (the k least significant bits, interpreted as an integer), and a (the rest of the bits as an integer).
The result of jumping ahead k is given by  f k (2 k a + b ) = 3 c ( b , k ) a + d ( b , k ) .
The values of c (or better 3 c ) and d can be precalculated for all possible k -bit numbers b , where d ( b , k ) is the result of applying the f function k times to b , and c ( b , k ) is the number of odd numbers encountered on the way.
For example, if k = 5 , one can jump ahead 5 steps on each iteration by separating out the 5 least significant bits of a number and using  c (0...31, 5) = { 0, 3, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 4, 1, 4, 1, 3, 2, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 3, 1, 1, 3, 3, 2, 3, 2, 4, 3, 3, 4, 5 },  d (0...31, 5) = { 0, 2, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 20, 1, 26, 1, 10, 4, 4, 13, 40, 2, 5, 17, 17, 2, 2, 20, 20, 8, 22, 8, 71, 26, 26, 80, 242 }.
This requires 2 k  precomputation and storage to speed up the resulting calculation by a factor of k , a space–time tradeoff .
Modular restrictions  For the special purpose of searching for a counterexample to the Collatz conjecture, this precomputation leads to an even more important acceleration, used by Tomás Oliveira e Silva in his computational confirmations of the Collatz conjecture up to large values of n .
If, for some given b and k , the inequality  f k (2 k a + b )  = 3 c ( b ) a + d ( b ) < 2 k a + b  holds for all a , then the first counterexample, if it exists, cannot be b modulo 2 k .
For instance, the first counterexample must be odd because f (2 n ) = n , smaller than 2 n ; and it must be 3 mod 4 because f 2 (4 n + 1) = 3 n + 1 , smaller than 4 n + 1 .
For each starting value a which is not a counterexample to the Collatz conjecture, there is a k for which such an inequality holds, so checking the Collatz conjecture for one starting value is as good as checking an entire congruence class.
As k increases, the search only needs to check those residues b that are not eliminated by lower values of k .
Only an exponentially small fraction of the residues survive.
For example, the only surviving residues mod 32 are 7, 15, 27, and 31.
Syracuse function  If k is an odd integer, then 3 k + 1 is even, so 3 k + 1 = 2 a k ′ with k ′ odd and a ≥ 1 .
The Syracuse function is the function f from the set I of positive odd integers into itself, for which f ( k ) = k ′ (sequence A075677 in the OEIS ).
Some properties of the Syracuse function are:  For all k ∈ I , f (4 k + 1) = f ( k ) .
(Because 3(4 k + 1) + 1 = 12 k + 4 = 4(3 k + 1) .)
In more generality: For all p ≥ 1 and odd h , f p − 1 (2 p h − 1) = 2 × 3 p − 1 h − 1 .
(Here f p − 1 is function iteration notation .)
For all odd h , f (2 h − 1) ≤ 3 h − 1 / 2  The Collatz conjecture is equivalent to the statement that, for all k in I , there exists an integer n ≥ 1 such that f n ( k ) = 1 .
Undecidable generalizations  Main article: FRACTRAN  In 1972, John Horton Conway proved that a natural generalization of the Collatz problem is algorithmically undecidable .
Specifically, he considered functions of the form      g  (  n  )  =   a   i    n  +   b   i      when    n  ≡  i    (  mod   P  )    ,    {\displaystyle {g(n)=a_{i}n+b_{i}}{\text{ when }}{n\equiv i{\pmod {P}}},}   where a 0 , b 0 , ..., a P − 1 , b P − 1 are rational numbers which are so chosen that g ( n ) is always an integer.
The standard Collatz function is given by P = 2 , a 0 = 1 / 2 , b 0 = 0 , a 1 = 3 , b 1 = 1 .
Conway proved that the problem  Given g and n , does the sequence of iterates g k ( n ) reach 1 ?
is undecidable, by representing the halting problem in this way.
Closer to the Collatz problem is the following universally quantified problem:  Given g , does the sequence of iterates g k ( n ) reach 1 , for all n > 0 ?
Modifying the condition in this way can make a problem either harder or easier to solve (intuitively, it is harder to justify a positive answer but might be easier to justify a negative one).
Kurtz and Simon  proved that the universally quantified problem is, in fact, undecidable and even higher in the arithmetical hierarchy ; specifically, it is Π 0 2 -complete.
This hardness result holds even if one restricts the class of functions g by fixing the modulus P to 6480.
Iterations of in a simplified version of this form, with all      b   i      {\displaystyle b_{i}}   equal to zero, are formalized in an esoteric programming language called FRACTRAN .
In popular culture  In the movie Incendies , a graduate student in pure mathematics explains the Collatz conjecture to a group of undergraduates.
She puts her studies on hold for a time to address some unresolved questions about her family's past.
Late in the movie, the Collatz conjecture turns out to have foreshadowed a disturbing and difficult discovery that she makes about her family.
Disproved mathematical conjecture  The graph shows the Mertens function      M  (  n  )    {\displaystyle M(n)}   and the square roots     ±    n      {\displaystyle \pm {\sqrt {n}}}   for     n  ≤  10  ,  000    {\displaystyle n\leq 10,000}   .
After computing these values, Mertens conjectured that the absolute value of     M  (  n  )    {\displaystyle M(n)}   is always bounded by       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   .
This hypothesis, known as the Mertens conjecture, was disproved in 1985 by Andrew Odlyzko and Herman te Riele .
In mathematics , the Mertens conjecture is the statement that the Mertens function      M  (  n  )    {\displaystyle M(n)}   is bounded by     ±    n      {\displaystyle \pm {\sqrt {n}}}   .
Although now disproven, it had been shown to imply the Riemann hypothesis .
It was conjectured by Thomas Joannes Stieltjes , in an 1885 letter to Charles Hermite (reprinted in Stieltjes ( 1905 )), and again in print by Franz Mertens ( 1897 ), and disproved by Andrew Odlyzko and Herman te Riele ( 1985 ).
It is a striking example of a mathematical conjecture proven false despite a large amount of computational evidence in its favor.
Definition  In number theory , the Mertens function is defined as     M  (  n  )  =   ∑   1  ≤  k  ≤  n    μ  (  k  )  ,    {\displaystyle M(n)=\sum _{1\leq k\leq n}\mu (k),}   where μ(k) is the Möbius function ; the Mertens conjecture is that for all n > 1,      |   M  (  n  )   |   <    n    .
{\displaystyle |M(n)|<{\sqrt {n}}.}
Disproof of the conjecture  Stieltjes claimed in 1885 to have proven a weaker result, namely that     m  (  n  )  :=  M  (  n  )   /     n      {\displaystyle m(n):=M(n)/{\sqrt {n}}}   was bounded , but did not publish a proof.
(In terms of     m  (  n  )    {\displaystyle m(n)}   , the Mertens conjecture is that     −  1  <  m  (  n  )  <  1    {\displaystyle -1<m(n)<1}   .)
In 1985, Andrew Odlyzko and Herman te Riele proved the Mertens conjecture false using the Lenstra–Lenstra–Lovász lattice basis reduction algorithm :        lim inf  m  (  n  )  <  −  1.009    {\displaystyle \liminf m(n)<-1.009}     and       lim sup  m  (  n  )  >  1.06.
{\displaystyle \limsup m(n)>1.06.}
It was later shown that the first counterexample appears below      e   3.21  ×   10   64      ≈   10   1.39  ×   10   64        {\displaystyle e^{3.21\times 10^{64}}\approx 10^{1.39\times 10^{64}}}    but above 10 16 .
The upper bound has since been lowered to      e   1.59  ×   10   40        {\displaystyle e^{1.59\times 10^{40}}}    or approximately      10   6.91  ×   10   39      ,    {\displaystyle 10^{6.91\times 10^{39}},}   but no explicit counterexample is known.
The law of the iterated logarithm states that if μ is replaced by a random sequence of +1s and −1s then the order of growth of the partial sum of the first n terms is (with probability 1) about √  n log log n , which suggests that the order of growth of m ( n ) might be somewhere around √ log log n .
The actual order of growth may be somewhat smaller;  in the early 1990s Steve Gonek conjectured  that the order of growth of m ( n ) was     (  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n   )   5   /   4    ,    {\displaystyle (\log \log \log n)^{5/4},}   which was affirmed by Ng (2004), based on a heuristic argument, that assumed the Riemann hypothesis and certain conjectures about the averaged behavior of zeros of the Riemann zeta function.
In 1979, Cohen and Dress  found the largest known value of     m  (  n  )  ≈  0.570591    {\displaystyle m(n)\approx 0.570591}   for M (7766842813) = 50286, and in 2011, Kuznetsov found the largest known negative value (in the sense of absolute value )     m  (  n  )  ≈  −  0.585768    {\displaystyle m(n)\approx -0.585768}   for M (11609864264058592345) = −1995900927.
In 2016, Hurst computed M ( n ) for every n ≤ 10 16 but did not find larger values of m ( n ) .
In 2006, Kotnik and te Riele improved the upper bound and showed that there are infinitely many values of n for which m ( n ) > 1.2184 , but without giving any specific value for such an n .
In 2016, Hurst made further improvements by showing     lim inf  m  (  n  )  <  −  1.837625    {\displaystyle \liminf m(n)<-1.837625}     and       lim sup  m  (  n  )  >  1.826054.
{\displaystyle \limsup m(n)>1.826054.}
Connection to the Riemann hypothesis  The connection to the Riemann hypothesis is based on the Dirichlet series for the reciprocal of the Riemann zeta function ,       1   ζ  (  s  )     =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞       μ  (  n  )    n   s      ,    {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\zeta (s)}}=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {\mu (n)}{n^{s}}},}   valid in the region       R  e    (  s  )  >  1    {\displaystyle {\mathcal {Re}}(s)>1}   .
We can rewrite this as a Stieltjes integral        1   ζ  (  s  )     =   ∫   0    ∞     x   −  s    d  M  (  x  )    {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{\zeta (s)}}=\int _{0}^{\infty }x^{-s}dM(x)}   and after integrating by parts, obtain the reciprocal of the zeta function
as a Mellin transform        1   s  ζ  (  s  )     =   {     M    M   }   (  −  s  )  =   ∫   0    ∞     x   −  s    M  (  x  )      d  x   x    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{s\zeta (s)}}=\left\{{\mathcal {M}}M\right\}(-s)=\int _{0}^{\infty }x^{-s}M(x)\,{\frac {dx}{x}}.}
Using the Mellin inversion theorem we now can express M in terms of 1 ⁄ ζ as     M  (  x  )  =    1   2  π  i      ∫   σ  −  i  ∞    σ  +  i  ∞       x   s     s  ζ  (  s  )      d  s    {\displaystyle M(x)={\frac {1}{2\pi i}}\int _{\sigma -i\infty }^{\sigma +i\infty }{\frac {x^{s}}{s\zeta (s)}}\,ds}   which is valid for 1 < σ < 2 , and valid for 1 ⁄ 2 < σ < 2 on the Riemann hypothesis.
From this, the Mellin transform integral must be convergent, and hence M ( x ) must be O ( x e ) for every exponent e greater than 1 / 2 .
From this it follows that     M  (  x  )  =  O    (     x      1  2     +  ϵ      )      {\displaystyle M(x)=O{\Big (}x^{{\tfrac {1}{2}}+\epsilon }{\Big )}}   for all positive ε is equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis, which therefore would have followed from the stronger Mertens hypothesis, and follows from the hypothesis of Stieltjes that     M  (  x  )  =  O    (     x     1  2        )    .
{\displaystyle M(x)=O{\Big (}x^{\tfrac {1}{2}}{\Big )}.}
References    ^  Borwein, Peter ; Choi, Stephen; Rooney, Brendan; Weirathmueller, Andrea, eds.
(2007).
The Riemann hypothesis.
A resource for the aficionado and virtuoso alike .
New York, NY: Springer-Verlag .
p.
69.
Zbl  1132.11047 .
^  Odlyzko, A.
M.
; te Riele, H.
J.
J.
(1985), "Disproof of the Mertens conjecture"  (PDF) , Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik , 1985 (357): 138–160, doi : 10.1515/crll.1985.357.138 , ISSN  0075-4102 , MR  0783538 , S2CID  13016831 , Zbl  0544.10047   ^  Sandor et al (2006) pp.
188–189.
^  Pintz, J.
(1987).
"An effective disproof of the Mertens conjecture"  (PDF) .
Astérisque .
147–148: 325–333.
Zbl  0623.10031 .
^ a  b  Hurst, Greg (2016).
"Computations of the Mertens function and improved bounds on the Mertens conjecture".
arXiv : 1610.08551 .
^  Kotnik and Te Riele (2006).
^ a  b  Ng, Nathan (2004).
"The distribution of the summatory function of the Möbius function"  (PDF) .
^  Cohen, H.
and Dress, F.
1979.
“Calcul numérique de Mx)” 11–13.
, Rapport, de I'ATP A12311 ≪ Informatique 1975 ≫   ^  Kuznetsov, Eugene (2011).
"Computing the Mertens function on a GPU".
arXiv : 1108.0135 .
^  Kotnik & te Riele (2006).
Further reading  Kotnik, Tadej; te Riele, Herman (2006).
"The Mertens Conjecture Revisited".
In Hess, Florian (ed.).
Algorithmic number theory.
7th international symposium, ANTS-VII, Berlin, Germany, July 23--28, 2006.
Proceedings .
4076.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag .
156–167.
doi : 10.1007/11792086_12 .
ISBN  3-540-36075-1 .
Zbl  1143.11345 .
Kotnik, T.; van de Lune, J.
"On the order of the Mertens function"  (PDF) .
Experimental Mathematics .
13 (4): 473–481.
doi : 10.1080/10586458.2004.10504556 .
S2CID  2093469 .
Archived from the original  (PDF) on 2007-04-03.
Mertens, F.
(1897).
"Über eine zahlentheoretische Funktion".
Sitzungsberichte der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftliche Klasse, Abteilung 2a .
106 : 761–830.
Odlyzko, A.
M.
; te Riele, H.
J.
J.
(1985), "Disproof of the Mertens conjecture"  (PDF) , Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik , 1985 (357): 138–160, doi : 10.1515/crll.1985.357.138 , ISSN  0075-4102 , MR  0783538 , S2CID  13016831 , Zbl  0544.10047  Pintz, J.
Sándor, József; Mitrinović, Dragoslav S.; Crstici, Borislav, eds.
(2006), Handbook of number theory I , Dordrecht: Springer-Verlag , pp.
187–189, ISBN  1-4020-4215-9 , Zbl  1151.11300  Stieltjes, T.
J.
(1905), "Lettre a Hermite de 11 juillet 1885, Lettre #79", in Baillaud, B.; Bourget, H.
(eds.
), Correspondance d'Hermite et Stieltjes , Paris: Gauthier—Villars, pp.
160–164 Weisstein, Eric W.
 "Mertens conjecture" .
External links  "A Prime Surprise (Mertens Conjecture)" .
Numberphile .
January 23, 2020.
Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 – via YouTube .
v t e Disproved conjectures  Borsuk's  Chinese hypothesis  Connes  Euler's sum of powers  Ganea  Hedetniemi's  Hauptvermutung  Hirsch  Kalman's  Keller's  Mertens  Ono's inequality  Pólya  Ragsdale  Schoen–Yau  Seifert  Tait's  Von Neumann  Weyl–Berry  Williamson  Authority control databases : National  Germany   Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mertens_conjecture&oldid=1219413931 "Algorithm that employs a degree of randomness as part of its logic or procedure  Part of a series on Probabilistic data structures  Bloom filter  Count sketch  Count–min sketch  Quotient filter  Skip list   Random trees  Random binary tree  Treap  Rapidly exploring random tree  Related  Randomized algorithm  HyperLogLog  v t e  "Randomized algorithms" redirects here.
Not to be confused with Algorithmic randomness .
A randomized algorithm is an algorithm that employs a degree of randomness as part of its logic or procedure.
The algorithm typically uses uniformly random bits as an auxiliary input to guide its behavior, in the hope of achieving good performance in the "average case" over all possible choices of random determined by the random bits; thus either the running time, or the output (or both) are random variables.
There is a distinction between algorithms that use the random input so that they always terminate with the correct answer, but where the expected running time is finite ( Las Vegas algorithms , for example Quicksort  ), and algorithms which have a chance of producing an incorrect result ( Monte Carlo algorithms , for example the Monte Carlo algorithm for the MFAS problem  ) or fail to produce a result either by signaling a failure or failing to terminate.
In some cases, probabilistic algorithms are the only practical means of solving a problem.
In common practice, randomized algorithms are approximated using a pseudorandom number generator in place of a true source of random bits; such an implementation may deviate from the expected theoretical behavior and mathematical guarantees which may depend on the existence of an ideal true random number generator.
Motivation   As a motivating example, consider the problem of finding an ‘ a ’ in an array of n elements.
Input : An array of n ≥2 elements, in which half are ‘ a ’s and the other half are ‘ b ’s.
Output : Find an ‘ a ’ in the array.
We give two versions of the algorithm, one Las Vegas algorithm and one Monte Carlo algorithm .
Las Vegas algorithm:  findingA_LV ( array  A ,  n )  begin   repeat   Randomly  select  one  element  out  of  n  elements .
until  'a'  is  found  end   This algorithm succeeds with probability 1.
The number of iterations varies and can be arbitrarily large, but the expected number of iterations is       lim   n  →  ∞     ∑   i  =  1    n      i   2   i      =  2    {\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }\sum _{i=1}^{n}{\frac {i}{2^{i}}}=2}    Since it is constant, the expected run time over many calls is     Θ  (  1  )    {\displaystyle \Theta (1)}   .
(See Big Theta notation ) Monte Carlo algorithm:  findingA_MC ( array  A ,  n ,  k )  begin   i  :=  0   repeat   Randomly  select  one  element  out  of  n  elements .
i  :=  i  +  1   until  i  =  k  or  'a'  is  found  end   If an ‘ a ’ is found, the algorithm succeeds, else the algorithm fails.
After k iterations, the probability of finding an ‘ a ’ is:       Pr    =  1  −  (  1   /   2   )   k      {\displaystyle \Pr=1-(1/2)^{k}}      This algorithm does not guarantee success, but the run time is bounded.
The number of iterations is always less than or equal to k.
 Taking k to be constant the run time (expected and absolute) is     Θ  (  1  )    {\displaystyle \Theta (1)}   .
Randomized algorithms are particularly useful when faced with a malicious "adversary" or attacker who deliberately tries to feed a bad input to the algorithm (see worst-case complexity and competitive analysis (online algorithm) ) such as in the Prisoner's dilemma .
It is for this reason that randomness is ubiquitous in cryptography .
In cryptographic applications, pseudo-random numbers cannot be used, since the adversary can predict them, making the algorithm effectively deterministic.
Therefore, either a source of truly random numbers or a cryptographically secure pseudo-random number generator is required.
Another area in which randomness is inherent is quantum computing .
In the example above, the Las Vegas algorithm always outputs the correct answer, but its running time is a random variable.
The Monte Carlo algorithm (related to the Monte Carlo method for simulation) is guaranteed to complete in an amount of time that can be bounded by a function the input size and its parameter k , but allows a small probability of error .
Observe that any Las Vegas algorithm can be converted into a Monte Carlo algorithm (via Markov's inequality ), by having it output an arbitrary, possibly incorrect answer if it fails to complete within a specified time.
Conversely, if an efficient verification procedure exists to check whether an answer is correct, then a Monte Carlo algorithm can be converted into a Las Vegas algorithm by running the Monte Carlo algorithm repeatedly till a correct answer is obtained.
Computational complexity   Computational complexity theory models randomized algorithms as probabilistic Turing machines .
Both Las Vegas and Monte Carlo algorithms are considered, and several complexity classes are studied.
The most basic randomized complexity class is RP , which is the class of decision problems for which there is an efficient (polynomial time) randomized algorithm (or probabilistic Turing machine) which recognizes NO-instances with absolute certainty and recognizes YES-instances with a probability of at least 1/2.
The complement class for RP is co-RP.
Problem classes having (possibly nonterminating) algorithms with polynomial time average case running time whose output is always correct are said to be in ZPP .
The class of problems for which both YES and NO-instances are allowed to be identified with some error is called BPP .
This class acts as the randomized equivalent of P , i.e.
BPP represents the class of efficient randomized algorithms.
Early history   Sorting   Quicksort was discovered by Tony Hoare in 1959, and subsequently published in 1961.
In the same year, Hoare published the quickselect algorithm ,  which finds the median element of a list in linear expected time.
It remained open until 1973 whether a deterministic linear-time algorithm existed.
Number theory   In 1917, Henry Cabourn Pocklington introduced a randomized algorithm known as Pocklington's algorithm for efficiently finding square roots modulo prime numbers.
In 1970, Elwyn Berlekamp introduced a randomized algorithm for efficiently computing the roots of a polynomial over a finite field.
In 1977, Robert M.
Solovay and Volker Strassen discovered a polynomial-time randomized primality test (i.e., determining the primality of a number).
Soon afterwards Michael O.
Rabin demonstrated that the 1976 Miller's primality test could also be turned into a polynomial-time randomized algorithm.
At that time, no provably polynomial-time deterministic algorithms for primality testing were known.
Data structures   One of the earliest randomized data structures is the hash table , which was introduced in 1953 by Hans Peter Luhn at IBM .
Luhn's hash table used chaining to resolve collisions and was also one of the first applications of linked lists .
Subsequently, in 1954, Gene Amdahl , Elaine M.
McGraw , Nathaniel Rochester , and Arthur Samuel of IBM Research introduced linear probing ,  although Andrey Ershov independently had the same idea in 1957.
In 1962, Donald Knuth performed the first correct analysis of linear probing,  although the memorandum containing his analysis was not published until much later.
The first published analysis was due to Konheim and Weiss in 1966.
Early works on hash tables either assumed access to a fully random hash function or assumed that the keys themselves were random.
In 1979, Carter and Wegman introduced universal hash functions ,  which they showed could be used to implement chained hash tables with constant expected time per operation.
Early work on randomized data structures also extended beyond hash tables.
In 1970, Burton Howard Bloom introduced an approximate-membership data structure known as the Bloom filter .
In 1989, Raimund Seidel and Cecilia R.
Aragon introduced a randomized balanced search tree known as the treap .
In the same year, William Pugh introduced another randomized search tree known as the skip list .
Implicit uses in combinatorics   Prior to the popularization of randomized algorithms in computer science, Paul Erdős popularized the use of randomized constructions as a mathematical technique for establishing the existence of mathematical objects.
This technique has become known as the probabilistic method .
Erdős gave his first application of the probabilistic method in 1947, when he used a simple randomized construction to establish the existence of Ramsey graphs.
He famously used a much more sophisticated randomized algorithm in 1959 to establish the existence of graphs with high girth and chromatic number.
Examples   Quicksort   Quicksort is a familiar, commonly used algorithm in which randomness can be useful.
Many deterministic versions of this algorithm require O ( n 2 ) time to sort n numbers for some well-defined class of degenerate inputs (such as an already sorted array), with the specific class of inputs that generate this behavior defined by the protocol for pivot selection.
However, if the algorithm selects pivot elements uniformly at random, it has a provably high probability of finishing in O ( n log n ) time regardless of the characteristics of the input.
Randomized incremental constructions in geometry   In computational geometry , a standard technique to build a structure like a convex hull or Delaunay triangulation is to randomly permute the input points and then insert them one by one into the existing structure.
The randomization ensures that the expected number of changes to the structure caused by an insertion is small, and so the expected running time of the algorithm can be bounded from above.
This technique is known as randomized incremental construction .
Min cut   Main article: Karger's algorithm  Input : A graph  G ( V , E ) Output : A cut partitioning the vertices into L and R , with the minimum number of edges between L and R .
Recall that the contraction of two nodes, u and v , in a (multi-)graph yields a new node u ' with edges that are the union of the edges incident on either u or v , except from any edge(s) connecting u and v .
Figure 1 gives an example of contraction of vertex A and B .
After contraction, the resulting graph may have parallel edges, but contains no self loops.
Figure 2: Successful run of Karger's algorithm on a 10-vertex graph.
The minimum cut has size 3 and is indicated by the vertex colours.
Figure 1: Contraction of vertex A and B  Karger's  basic algorithm:  begin i = 1 repeat  repeat Take a random edge (u,v) ∈ E in G
            replace u and v with the contraction u' until only 2 nodes remain
        obtain the corresponding cut result C i i = i + 1 until i = m
    output the minimum cut among C 1 , C 2 , ..., C m .
end   In each execution of the outer loop, the algorithm repeats the inner loop until only 2 nodes remain, the corresponding cut is obtained.
The run time of one execution is     O  (  n  )    {\displaystyle O(n)}   , and n denotes the number of vertices.
After m times executions of the outer loop, we output the minimum cut among all the results.
The figure 2 gives an
example of one execution of the algorithm.
After execution, we get a cut of size 3.
Lemma 1 — Let k be the min cut size, and let C = { e 1 , e 2 , ..., e k } be the min cut.
If, during iteration i , no edge e ∈ C is selected for contraction, then C i = C .
Proof  If G is not connected, then G can be partitioned into L and R without any edge between them.
So the min cut in a disconnected graph is 0.
Now, assume G is connected.
Let V = L ∪ R be the partition of V induced by C : C = { { u , v } ∈ E : u ∈ L , v ∈ R } (well-defined since G is connected).
Consider an edge { u , v } of C .
Initially, u , v are distinct vertices.
As long as we pick an edge     f  ≠  e    {\displaystyle f\neq e}   , u and v do not get merged.
Thus, at the end of the algorithm, we have two compound nodes covering the entire graph, one consisting of the vertices of L and the other consisting of the vertices of R .
As in figure 2, the size of min cut is 1, and C = {( A , B )}.
If we don't select ( A , B ) for contraction, we can get the min cut.
Lemma 2 — If G is a multigraph with p vertices and whose min cut has size k , then G has at least pk /2 edges.
Proof  Because the min cut is k , every vertex v must satisfy degree( v ) ≥ k .
Therefore, the sum of the degree is at least pk .
But it is well known that the sum of vertex degrees equals 2| E |.
The lemma follows.
Analysis of algorithm   The probability that the algorithm succeeds is 1 − the probability that all attempts fail.
By independence, the probability that all attempts fail is      ∏   i  =  1    m    Pr  (   C   i    ≠  C  )  =   ∏   i  =  1    m    (  1  −  Pr  (   C   i    =  C  )  )  .
{\displaystyle \prod _{i=1}^{m}\Pr(C_{i}\neq C)=\prod _{i=1}^{m}(1-\Pr(C_{i}=C)).}
By lemma 1, the probability that C i = C is the probability that no edge of C is selected during iteration i .
Consider the inner loop and let G j denote the graph after j edge contractions, where j ∈ {0, 1, …, n − 3} .
G j has n − j vertices.
We use the chain rule of conditional possibilities .
The probability that the edge chosen at iteration j is not in C , given that no edge of C has been chosen before, is     1  −    k    |   E  (   G   j    )   |        {\displaystyle 1-{\frac {k}{|E(G_{j})|}}}   .
Note that G j still has min cut of size k , so by Lemma 2, it still has at least        (  n  −  j  )  k   2      {\displaystyle {\frac {(n-j)k}{2}}}   edges.
Thus,     1  −    k    |   E  (   G   j    )   |      ≥  1  −    2   n  −  j     =     n  −  j  −  2    n  −  j       {\displaystyle 1-{\frac {k}{|E(G_{j})|}}\geq 1-{\frac {2}{n-j}}={\frac {n-j-2}{n-j}}}   .
So by the chain rule, the probability of finding the min cut C is     Pr    ≥   (     n  −  2   n    )    (     n  −  3    n  −  1     )    (     n  −  4    n  −  2     )   …   (    3  5    )    (    2  4    )    (    1  3    )   .
{\displaystyle \Pr\geq \left({\frac {n-2}{n}}\right)\left({\frac {n-3}{n-1}}\right)\left({\frac {n-4}{n-2}}\right)\ldots \left({\frac {3}{5}}\right)\left({\frac {2}{4}}\right)\left({\frac {1}{3}}\right).}
Cancellation gives     Pr    ≥    2   n  (  n  −  1  )       {\displaystyle \Pr\geq {\frac {2}{n(n-1)}}}   .
Thus the probability that the algorithm succeeds is at least     1  −    (   1  −    2   n  (  n  −  1  )      )    m      {\displaystyle 1-\left(1-{\frac {2}{n(n-1)}}\right)^{m}}   .
For     m  =     n  (  n  −  1  )   2    ln  ⁡  n    {\displaystyle m={\frac {n(n-1)}{2}}\ln n}   , this is equivalent to     1  −    1  n      {\displaystyle 1-{\frac {1}{n}}}   .
The algorithm finds the min cut with probability     1  −    1  n      {\displaystyle 1-{\frac {1}{n}}}   , in time     O  (  m  n  )  =  O  (   n   3    log  ⁡  n  )    {\displaystyle O(mn)=O(n^{3}\log n)}   .
Derandomization   This section does not cite any sources .
Find sources:  "Randomized algorithm" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Randomness can be viewed as a resource, like space and time.
Derandomization is then the process of removing randomness (or using as little of it as possible).
It is not currently known  if all algorithms can be derandomized without significantly increasing their running time.
For instance, in computational complexity , it is unknown whether P = BPP , i.e., we do not know whether we can take an arbitrary randomized algorithm that runs in polynomial time with a small error probability and derandomize it to run in polynomial time without using randomness.
There are specific methods that can be employed to derandomize particular randomized algorithms:  the method of conditional probabilities , and its generalization, pessimistic estimators  discrepancy theory (which is used to derandomize geometric algorithms)  the exploitation of limited independence in the random variables used by the algorithm, such as the pairwise independence used in universal hashing  the use of expander graphs (or dispersers in general) to amplify a limited amount of initial randomness (this last approach is also referred to as generating pseudorandom bits from a random source, and leads to the related topic of pseudorandomness)  changing the randomized algorithm to use a hash function as a source of randomness for the algorithm's tasks, and then derandomizing the algorithm by brute-forcing all possible parameters (seeds) of the hash function.
This technique is usually used to exhaustively search a sample space and making the algorithm deterministic (e.g.
randomized graph algorithms)  Where randomness helps   When the model of computation is restricted to Turing machines , it is currently an open question whether the ability to make random choices allows some problems to be solved in polynomial time that cannot be solved in polynomial time without this ability; this is the question of whether P = BPP.
However, in other contexts, there are specific examples of problems where randomization yields strict improvements.
Based on the initial motivating example: given an exponentially long string of 2 k characters, half a's and half b's, a random-access machine requires 2 k −1 lookups in the worst-case to find the index of an a ; if it is permitted to make random choices, it can solve this problem in an expected polynomial number of lookups.
The natural way of carrying out a numerical computation in embedded systems or cyber-physical systems is to provide a result that approximates the correct one with high probability (or Probably Approximately Correct Computation (PACC)).
The hard problem associated with the evaluation of the discrepancy loss between the approximated and the correct computation can be effectively addressed by resorting to randomization   In communication complexity , the equality of two strings can be verified to some reliability using     log  ⁡  n    {\displaystyle \log n}   bits of communication with a randomized protocol.
Any deterministic protocol requires     Θ  (  n  )    {\displaystyle \Theta (n)}   bits if defending against a strong opponent.
The volume of a convex body can be estimated by a randomized algorithm to arbitrary precision in polynomial time.
Bárány and Füredi showed that no deterministic algorithm can do the same.
This is true unconditionally, i.e.
without relying on any complexity-theoretic assumptions, assuming the convex body can be queried only as a black box.
A more complexity-theoretic example of a place where randomness appears to help is the class IP .
IP consists of all languages that can be accepted (with high probability) by a polynomially long interaction between an all-powerful prover and a verifier that implements a BPP algorithm.
IP = PSPACE .
However, if it is required that the verifier be deterministic, then IP = NP .
In a chemical reaction network (a finite set of reactions like A+B → 2C + D operating on a finite number of molecules), the ability to ever reach a given target state from an initial state is decidable, while even approximating the probability of ever reaching a given target state (using the standard concentration-based probability for which reaction will occur next) is undecidable.
More specifically, a limited Turing machine  can be simulated with arbitrarily high probability of running correctly for all time, only if a random chemical reaction network is used.
With a simple nondeterministic chemical reaction network (any possible reaction can happen next), the computational power is limited to primitive recursive functions .
Algorithm for determining whether a number is prime  A primality test is an algorithm for determining whether an input number is prime .
Among other fields of mathematics , it is used for cryptography .
Unlike integer factorization , primality tests do not generally give prime factors , only stating whether the input number is prime or not.
Factorization is thought to be a computationally difficult problem, whereas primality testing is comparatively easy (its running time is polynomial in the size of the input).
Some primality tests prove that a number is prime, while others like Miller–Rabin prove that a number is composite .
Therefore, the latter might more accurately be called compositeness tests instead of primality tests.
Simple methods  The simplest primality test is trial division :  given an input number,     n    {\displaystyle n}   , check whether it is divisible by any prime number between 2 and       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   (i.e., whether the division leaves no remainder ).
If so, then     n    {\displaystyle n}   is composite .
Otherwise, it is prime.
For any divisor     p  ≥    n      {\displaystyle p\geq {\sqrt {n}}}   , there must be another divisor     n   /   p  ≤    n      {\displaystyle n/p\leq {\sqrt {n}}}   , and a prime divisor     q    {\displaystyle q}   of     n   /   p    {\displaystyle n/p}   , and therefore looking for prime divisors at most       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   is sufficient.
For example, consider the number 100, whose divisors are these numbers: 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100.
When all possible divisors up to     n    {\displaystyle n}   are tested, some divisors will be discovered twice .
To observe this, consider the list of divisor pairs of 100:     1  ×  100  ,   2  ×  50  ,   4  ×  25  ,   5  ×  20  ,   10  ×  10  ,   20  ×  5  ,   25  ×  4  ,   50  ×  2  ,   100  ×  1    {\displaystyle 1\times 100,\;2\times 50,\;4\times 25,\;5\times 20,\;10\times 10,\;20\times 5,\;25\times 4,\;50\times 2,\;100\times 1}   .
Products past     10  ×  10    {\displaystyle 10\times 10}   are the reverse of products that appeared earlier.
For example,     5  ×  20    {\displaystyle 5\times 20}   and     20  ×  5    {\displaystyle 20\times 5}   are the reverse of each other.
Further, that of the two divisors,     5  ≤    100    =  10    {\displaystyle 5\leq {\sqrt {100}}=10}   and     20  ≥    100    =  10    {\displaystyle 20\geq {\sqrt {100}}=10}   .
This observation generalizes to all     n    {\displaystyle n}   : all divisor pairs of     n    {\displaystyle n}   contain a divisor less than or equal to       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   , so the algorithm need only search for divisors less than or equal to       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   to guarantee detection of all divisor pairs.
Also, 2 is a prime dividing 100, which immediately proves that 100 is not prime.
Every positive integer except 1 is divisible by at least one prime number by the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic .
Therefore the algorithm need only search for prime divisors less than or equal to       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   .
For another example, consider how this algorithm determines the primality of 17.
One has     4  <    17    <  5    {\displaystyle 4<{\sqrt {17}}<5}   , and the only primes     ≤    17      {\displaystyle \leq {\sqrt {17}}}   are 2 and 3.
Neither divides 17, proving that 17 is prime.
For a last example, consider 221.
One has     14  <    221    <  15    {\displaystyle 14<{\sqrt {221}}<15}   , and the primes     ≤    221      {\displaystyle \leq {\sqrt {221}}}   are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13.
Upon checking each, one discovers that     221   /   13  =  17    {\displaystyle 221/13=17}   , proving that 221 is not prime.
In cases where it is not feasible to compute the list of primes     ≤    n      {\displaystyle \leq {\sqrt {n}}}   , it is also possible to simply (and slowly) check all numbers between     2    {\displaystyle 2}   and       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   for divisors.
A rather simple optimization is to test divisibility by 2 and by just the odd numbers between 3 and       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   , since divisibility by an even number implies divisibility by 2.
This method can be improved further.
Observe that all primes greater than 3 are of the form     6  k  +  i    {\displaystyle 6k+i}   for a nonnegative integer     k    {\displaystyle k}   and     i  ∈  {  1  ,  5  }    {\displaystyle i\in \{1,5\}}   .
Indeed, every integer is of the form     6  k  +  i    {\displaystyle 6k+i}   for a positive integer     k    {\displaystyle k}   and     i  ∈  {  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  4  ,  5  }    {\displaystyle i\in \{0,1,2,3,4,5\}}   .
Since 2 divides     6  k  ,  6  k  +  2    {\displaystyle 6k,6k+2}   , and     6  k  +  4    {\displaystyle 6k+4}   , and 3 divides     6  k    {\displaystyle 6k}   and     6  k  +  3    {\displaystyle 6k+3}   , the only possible remainders mod 6 for a prime greater than 3 are 1 and 5.
So, a more efficient primality test for     n    {\displaystyle n}   is to test whether     n    {\displaystyle n}   is divisible by 2 or 3, then to check through all numbers of the form     6  k  +  1    {\displaystyle 6k+1}   and     6  k  +  5    {\displaystyle 6k+5}   which are     ≤    n      {\displaystyle \leq {\sqrt {n}}}   .
This is almost three times as fast as testing all numbers up to       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   .
Generalizing further, all primes greater than     c  #    {\displaystyle c\#}   ( c primorial ) are of the form     c  #  ⋅  k  +  i    {\displaystyle c\#\cdot k+i}   for     i  ,  k    {\displaystyle i,k}   positive integers,     0  ≤  i  <  c  #    {\displaystyle 0\leq i<c\#}   , and     i    {\displaystyle i}    coprime to     c  #    {\displaystyle c\#}   .
For example, consider     6  #  =  2  ⋅  3  ⋅  5  =  30    {\displaystyle 6\#=2\cdot 3\cdot 5=30}   .
All integers are of the form     30  k  +  i    {\displaystyle 30k+i}   for     i  ,  k    {\displaystyle i,k}   integers with     0  ≤  i  <  30    {\displaystyle 0\leq i<30}   .
Now, 2 divides     0  ,  2  ,  4  ,  …  ,  28    {\displaystyle 0,2,4,\dots ,28}   , 3 divides     0  ,  3  ,  6  ,  …  ,  27    {\displaystyle 0,3,6,\dots ,27}   , and 5 divides     0  ,  5  ,  10  ,  …  ,  25    {\displaystyle 0,5,10,\dots ,25}   .
Thus all prime numbers greater than 30 are of the form     30  k  +  i    {\displaystyle 30k+i}   for     i  ∈  {  1  ,  7  ,  11  ,  13  ,  17  ,  19  ,  23  ,  29  }    {\displaystyle i\in \{1,7,11,13,17,19,23,29\}}   .
Of course, not all numbers of the form     c  #  ⋅  k  +  i    {\displaystyle c\#\cdot k+i}   with     i    {\displaystyle i}   coprime to     c  #    {\displaystyle c\#}   are prime.
For example,     19  ⋅  23  =  437  =  210  ⋅  2  +  17  =  2  ⋅  7  #  +  17    {\displaystyle 19\cdot 23=437=210\cdot 2+17=2\cdot 7\#+17}   is not prime, even though 17 is coprime to     7  #  =  2  ⋅  3  ⋅  5  ⋅  7    {\displaystyle 7\#=2\cdot 3\cdot 5\cdot 7}   .
As     c    {\displaystyle c}   grows, the fraction of coprime remainders to remainders decreases, and so the time to test     n    {\displaystyle n}   decreases (though it still necessary to check for divisibility by all primes that are less than     c    {\displaystyle c}   ).
Observations analogous to the preceding can be applied recursively , giving the Sieve of Eratosthenes .
One way to speed up these methods (and all the others mentioned below) is to pre-compute and store a list of all primes up to a certain bound, such as all primes up to 200.
(Such a list can be computed with the Sieve of Eratosthenes or by an algorithm that tests each incremental     m    {\displaystyle m}   against all known primes     ≤    m      {\displaystyle \leq {\sqrt {m}}}   ).
Then, before testing     n    {\displaystyle n}   for primality with a large-scale method,     n    {\displaystyle n}   can first be checked for divisibility by any prime from the list.
If it is divisible by any of those numbers then it is composite, and any further tests can be skipped.
A simple but very inefficient primality test uses Wilson's theorem , which states that     p    {\displaystyle p}   is prime if and only if:     (  p  −  1  )  !
≡  −  1    (  mod   p  )     {\displaystyle (p-1)!\equiv -1{\pmod {p}}}   Although this method requires about     p    {\displaystyle p}   modular multiplications, rendering it impractical, theorems about primes and modular residues form the basis of many more practical methods.
Example code  Primality tests can be implemented in various ways.
Here are examples in different programming languages : Python  This test is in Python using the simple 6 k ± 1 optimization mentioned earlier.
More sophisticated methods described below are much faster for large n .
from  math  import  isqrt  def  is_prime ( n :  int )  ->  bool :   if  n  <=  3 :   return  n  >  1   if  n  %  2  ==  0  or  n  %  3  ==  0 :   return  False   limit  =  isqrt ( n )   for  i  in  range ( 5 ,  limit + 1 ,  6 ):   if  n  %  i  ==  0  or  n  %  ( i + 2 )  ==  0 :   return  False   return  True  C, C++, C#, D  This test is in the C family of curly-bracket languages using the same optimization as above.
bool  IsPrime ( int  n )  {   if  ( n  ==  2  ||  n  ==  3 )   return  true ;    if  ( n  <=  1  ||  n  %  2  ==  0  ||  n  %  3  ==  0 )   return  false ;    for  ( int  i  =  5 ;  i  *  i  <=  n ;  i  +=  6 )   {   if  ( n  %  i  ==  0  ||  n  %  ( i  +  2 )  ==  0 )   return  false ;   }    return  true ;  }  PHP  This test is in PHP using same optimization as above.
Was orginally implemented by Mark Rogoyski in MathPHP library.
function  isPrime ( int  $n ) :  bool  {   if  ( $n  <=  1 )  {   return  false ;   }    if  ( $n  ===  2  ||  $n  ===  3 )  {   return  true ;   }    if  ( $n  %  2  ===  0  ||  $n  %  3  ===  0 )  {   return  false ;   }    for  ( $i  =  5 ;  $i  <=  \sqrt ( $n );  $i  +=  6 )  {   if  ( $n  %  $i  ===  0  ||  $n  %  ( $i  +  2 )  ===  0 )  {   return  false ;   }   }    return  true ;  }  OCaml  This test is in OCaml using same optimization as above.
let  is_prime  n  =   if  n  <=  1  then   false   else   ( if  n  =  2  ||  n  =  3  then   true   else   ( if  n  mod  2  =  0  ||  n  mod  3  =  0  then   false   else   let  i  =  ref  5  in   while  !
i  *  !
i  <=  n  &&  n  mod  !
i  <>  0  &&  n  mod  (!
i  +  2 )  <>  0  do   i  :=  !
i  +  6   done ;   (!
i  >  n )   )   )  Rust  This test is in Rust using same optimization as above.
fn  is_prime ( n : i32 )  -> bool  {   if  n  ==  2  ||  n  ==  3  {   return  true ;   }    if  n  <=  1  ||  n  %  2  ==  0  ||  n  %  3  ==  0  {   return  false ;   }    ( 5 ..
)   .
step_by ( 6 )   .
take_while ( | i |  i  *  i  <=  n )   .
all ( | i |  n  %  i  !=  0  &&  n  %  ( i  +  2 )  !=  0 )  }  Java  This test is in Java using the same optimization as above.
import  java.util.
* ;   public  static  boolean  isPrime ( int  n ){     if  ( n  <=  1 )   return  false ;     if  ( n  ==  2  ||  n  ==  3 )   return  true ;     if  ( n  %  2  ==  0  ||  n  %  3  ==  0 )   return  false ;     for  ( int  i  =  5 ;  i  <=  Math .
sqrt ( n );  i  =  i  +  6 )   if  ( n  %  i  ==  0  ||  n  %  ( i  +  2 )  ==  0 )   return  false ;    return  true ;  }  JavaScript  This test is in JavaScript using the same optimization as above.
function  isPrime ( num )  {   if  ( num  ==  2  ||  num  ==  3 )   return  true ;   if  ( num  <=  1  ||  num  %  2  ==  0  ||  num  %  3  ==  0 )   return  false ;    for  ( let  i  =  5 ;  i  *  i  <=  num  ;  i += 6 )  {   if  ( num  %  i  ==  0  ||  num  %  ( i  +  2 )  ==  0 )   return  false ;   }   return  true ;  }  R  This test is in R using the same optimization as above.
is.prime  <-  function ( number )  {   if ( number  <=  1 )  {   return ( FALSE )   }  else  if ( number  <=  3 )  {   return ( TRUE )   }    if ( number  %%  2  ==  0  ||  number  %%  3  ==  0 )  {   return ( FALSE )   }    i  <-  5   while ( i * i  <=  number )  {   if ( number  %%  i  ==  0  ||  number  %%  ( i +2 )  ==  0 )  {   return ( FALSE )   }   i  =  i  +  6   }   return ( TRUE )  }  Dart  This test is in Dart using the same optimization as above.
checkIfPrimeNumber ( number )  {   if  ( number  ==  2  ||  number  ==  3 )  {   return  'true' ;   }  else  if  ( number  <=  1  ||  number  %  2  ==  0  ||  number  %  3  ==  0 )  {   return  'false' ;   }   for  ( int  i  =  5 ;  i  *  i  <=  number ;  i  +=  6 )  {   if  ( number  %  i  ==  0  ||  number  %  ( i  +  2 )  ==  0 )  {   return  'false' ;   }   }   return  'true' ;  }  Free Pascal  This test is in Free Pascal using the same optimization as above.
function  IsPrime ( N :  Int64 ) : Boolean ;  var   I :  Int64 ;  begin   if  (( N  =  2 )  or  ( N  =  3 ))  then   Exit ( True ) ;   if  (( N  <=  1 )  or  (( N  mod  2 )  =  0 )  or  (( N  mod  3 )  =  0 ))  then   Exit ( False ) ;   I  :=  5 ;   while  ( I  *  I  <=  N )  do   begin   if  (( N  mod  I )  =  0 )  or  (( N  mod  ( I  +  2 ))  =  0 )  then   Exit ( False ) ;   Inc ( I ,  6 ) ;   end ;   Exit ( True ) ;  end ;  Go  This test is in Go using the same optimization as above.
func  IsPrime ( num  int )  bool  {   if  num  >  1  &&  num  <=  3  {   return  true   }   if  num  <=  1  ||  num % 2  ==  0  ||  num % 3  ==  0  {   return  false   }    for  i  :=  5 ;  i * i  <=  num ;  i  +=  6  {   if  num % i  ==  0  ||  num % ( i + 2 )  ==  0  {   return  false   }   }   return  true  }  Haskell  This test is in Haskell using the same optimization as above.
isPrime  ::  Int  ->  Bool  isPrime  =  go  $  2  :  3  :  scanl  ( + )  5  ( cycle  )   where   go  ( p : ps )  n   |  p  *  p  >  n  =  True   |  n  ` mod `  p  ==  0  =  False   |  otherwise  =  go  ps  n  Regular expression  The simple method can also be performed using a Regular expression by generating a string of n  identical characters  and running an expression of the form: /^.?$|^(..+?
)\1+$/ If the expression matches, the number is not a prime number.
The expression consists of two branches: The first branch matches 0 and 1.
The second branch will check if any sequence of 2 or more characters exists that repeats a whole number of times, starting at the smallest sequence and working up.
(The quantifier +?
is a lazy quantifier , meaning it will try to match as few characters as possible, only increasing the size if no match is found using that value).
While this is a compact check, it executes the less efficient version where all possible divisors from 2 to n are checked, not stopping at       n      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {n}}}   .
Heuristic tests  These are tests that seem to work well in practice, but are unproven and therefore are not, technically speaking, algorithms at all.
The Fermat test and the Fibonacci test are simple examples, and they are very effective when combined.
John Selfridge has conjectured that if p is an odd number, and p ≡ ±2 (mod 5), then p will be prime if both of the following hold: 2 p −1 ≡ 1 (mod p ),  f p +1 ≡ 0 (mod p ), where f k is the k -th Fibonacci number .
The first condition is the Fermat primality test using base 2.
In general, if p ≡ a (mod x 2 +4), where a is a quadratic non-residue (mod x 2 +4) then p should be prime if the following conditions hold: 2 p −1 ≡ 1 (mod p ),  f ( 1 ) p +1 ≡ 0 (mod p ), f ( x ) k is the k -th Fibonacci polynomial at x .
Selfridge, Carl Pomerance , and Samuel Wagstaff together offer $620 for a counterexample.
Probabilistic tests  Probabilistic tests are more rigorous than heuristics in that they provide provable bounds on the probability of being fooled by a composite number.
Many popular primality tests are probabilistic tests.
These tests use, apart from the tested number n , some other numbers a which are chosen at random from some sample space ; the usual randomized primality tests never report a prime number as composite, but it is possible for a composite number to be reported as prime.
The probability of error can be reduced by repeating the test with several independently chosen values of a ; for two commonly used tests, for any composite n at least half the a ' s detect n ' s compositeness, so k repetitions reduce the error probability to at most 2 − k , which can be made arbitrarily small by increasing k .
The basic structure of randomized primality tests is as follows: Randomly pick a number a .
Check equality (corresponding to the chosen test) involving a and the given number n .
If the equality fails to hold true, then n is a composite number and a is a witness for the compositeness, and the test stops.
Get back to the step one until the required accuracy is reached.
After one or more iterations, if n is not found to be a composite number, then it can be declared probably prime .
Fermat primality test  The simplest probabilistic primality test is the Fermat primality test (actually a compositeness test).
It works as follows: Given an integer n , choose some integer a coprime to n and calculate a n − 1  modulo  n .
If the result is different from 1, then n is composite.
If it is 1, then n may be prime.
If a n −1 (modulo n ) is 1 but n is not prime, then n is called a pseudoprime to base a .
In practice, if a n −1 (modulo n )
is 1, then n is usually prime.
But here is a counterexample:
if n = 341 and a = 2, then      2   340    ≡  1    (  mod   341  )     {\displaystyle 2^{340}\equiv 1{\pmod {341}}}   even though 341 = 11·31 is composite.
In fact, 341 is the smallest pseudoprime base 2 (see Figure 1 of  ).
There are only 21853 pseudoprimes base 2 that are less than 2.5 × 10 10 (see page 1005 of  ).
This means that, for n up to 2.5 × 10 10 , if 2 n −1 (modulo n ) equals 1, then n is prime, unless n is one of these 21853 pseudoprimes.
Some composite numbers ( Carmichael numbers ) have the property that a n − 1 is 1 (modulo n ) for every a that is coprime to n .
The smallest example is n = 561 = 3·11·17, for which a 560 is 1 (modulo 561) for all a coprime to 561.
Nevertheless, the Fermat test is often used if a rapid screening of numbers is needed, for instance in the key generation phase of the RSA public key cryptographic algorithm .
Miller–Rabin and Solovay–Strassen primality test  The Miller–Rabin primality test and Solovay–Strassen primality test are more sophisticated variants, which detect all composites (once again, this means: for every composite number n , at least 3/4 (Miller–Rabin) or 1/2 (Solovay–Strassen) of numbers a are witnesses of compositeness of n ).
These are also compositeness tests.
The Miller–Rabin primality test works as follows:
Given an integer n , choose some positive integer a < n .
Let 2 s d = n − 1, where d is odd.
If      a   d    ≢  ±  1    (  mod   n  )     {\displaystyle a^{d}\not \equiv \pm 1{\pmod {n}}}   and      a    2   r    d    ≢  −  1    (  mod   n  )     {\displaystyle a^{2^{r}d}\not \equiv -1{\pmod {n}}}   for all     0  ≤  r  ≤  s  −  1  ,    {\displaystyle 0\leq r\leq s-1,}   then n is composite and a is a witness for the compositeness.
Otherwise, n may or may not be prime.
The Miller–Rabin test is a strong probable prime test (see PSW  page 1004).
The Solovay–Strassen primality test uses another equality: Given an odd number n , choose some integer a < n , if      a   (  n  −  1  )   /   2    ≢   (    a  n    )     (  mod   n  )     {\displaystyle a^{(n-1)/2}\not \equiv \left({\frac {a}{n}}\right){\pmod {n}}}   , where      (    a  n    )     {\displaystyle \left({\frac {a}{n}}\right)}   is the Jacobi symbol , then n is composite and a is a witness for the compositeness.
The Solovay–Strassen test is an Euler probable prime test (see PSW  page 1003).
For each individual value of a , the Solovay–Strassen test is weaker than the Miller–Rabin test.
For example, if n = 1905 and a = 2, then the Miller-Rabin test shows that n is composite, but the Solovay–Strassen test does not.
This is because 1905 is an Euler
pseudoprime base 2 but not a strong pseudoprime base 2 (this is illustrated in Figure 1 of PSW  ).
Frobenius primality test  The Miller–Rabin and the Solovay–Strassen primality tests are simple and are much faster than other general primality tests.
One method of improving efficiency further in some cases is the Frobenius pseudoprimality test ; a round of this test takes about three times as long as a round of Miller–Rabin, but achieves a probability bound comparable to seven rounds of Miller–Rabin.
The Frobenius test is a generalization of the Lucas probable prime test.
Baillie–PSW primality test  The Baillie–PSW primality test is a probabilistic primality test that combines a Fermat or Miller–Rabin test with a Lucas probable prime test to get a primality test that has no known counterexamples.
That is, there are no known composite n for which this test reports that n is probably prime.
It has been shown that there are no counterexamples for n      <   2   64      {\displaystyle <2^{64}}   .
Other tests  Leonard Adleman and Ming-Deh Huang presented an errorless (but expected polynomial-time) variant of the elliptic curve primality test .
Unlike the other probabilistic tests, this algorithm produces a primality certificate , and thus can be used to prove that a number is prime.
The algorithm is prohibitively slow in practice.
If quantum computers were available, primality could be tested asymptotically faster than by using classical computers.
A combination of Shor's algorithm , an integer factorization method, with the Pocklington primality test could solve the problem in     O  (  (  log  ⁡  n   )   3    (  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n   )   2    log  ⁡  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n  )    {\displaystyle O((\log n)^{3}(\log \log n)^{2}\log \log \log n)}   .
Fast deterministic tests  Near the beginning of the 20th century, it was shown that a corollary of Fermat's little theorem could be used to test for primality.
This resulted in the Pocklington primality test .
However, as this test requires a partial factorization of n − 1 the running time was still quite slow in the worst case.
The first deterministic primality test significantly faster than the naive methods was the cyclotomy test ; its runtime can be proven to be O ((log n ) c log log log n ), where n is the number to test for primality and c is a constant independent of n .
Many further improvements were made, but none could be proven to have polynomial running time.
(Running time is measured in terms of the size of the input, which in this case is ~ log n , that being the number of bits needed to represent the number n .)
The elliptic curve primality test can be proven to run in O((log n ) 6 ), if some conjectures on analytic number theory are true.
Similarly, under the generalized Riemann hypothesis , the deterministic Miller's test , which forms the basis of the probabilistic Miller–Rabin test, can be proved to run in Õ ((log n ) 4 ).
In practice, this algorithm is slower than the other two for sizes of numbers that can be dealt with at all.
Because the implementation of these two methods is rather difficult and creates a risk of programming errors, slower but simpler tests are often preferred.
In 2002, the first provably unconditional deterministic polynomial time test for primality was invented by Manindra Agrawal , Neeraj Kayal , and Nitin Saxena .
The AKS primality test runs in Õ((log n ) 12 ) (improved to Õ((log n ) 7.5 )  in the published revision of their paper), which can be further reduced to Õ((log n ) 6 ) if the Sophie Germain conjecture is true.
Subsequently, Lenstra and Pomerance presented a version of the test which runs in time Õ((log n ) 6 ) unconditionally.
Agrawal, Kayal and Saxena suggest a variant of their algorithm which would run in  Õ((log n ) 3 )  if Agrawal's conjecture is true; however, a heuristic argument by Hendrik Lenstra and Carl Pomerance suggests that it is probably false.
A modified version of the Agrawal's conjecture, the Agrawal–Popovych conjecture,  may still be true.
Complexity  In computational complexity theory , the formal language corresponding to the prime numbers is denoted as PRIMES.
It is easy to show that PRIMES is in Co-NP : its complement COMPOSITES is in NP because one can decide compositeness by nondeterministically guessing a factor.
In 1975, Vaughan Pratt showed that there existed a certificate for primality that was checkable in polynomial time, and thus that PRIMES was in NP , and therefore in       N  P  ∩  c  o  N  P      {\displaystyle {\mathsf {NP\cap coNP}}}   .
See primality certificate for details.
The subsequent discovery of the Solovay–Strassen and Miller–Rabin algorithms put PRIMES in coRP .
In 1992, the Adleman–Huang algorithm  reduced the complexity to         Z  P  P    =  R  P  ∩  c  o  R  P      {\displaystyle {\mathsf {{\color {Blue}ZPP}=RP\cap coRP}}}   , which superseded Pratt's result.
The Adleman–Pomerance–Rumely primality test from 1983 put PRIMES in QP ( quasi-polynomial time ), which is not known to be comparable with the classes mentioned above.
Because of its tractability in practice, polynomial-time algorithms assuming the Riemann hypothesis, and other similar evidence, it was long suspected but not proven that primality could be solved in polynomial time.
The existence of the AKS primality test finally settled this long-standing question and placed PRIMES in P .
However, PRIMES is not known to be P-complete , and it is not known whether it lies in classes lying inside P such as NC or L .
It is known that PRIMES is not in AC 0 .
Number-theoretic methods  Certain number-theoretic methods exist for testing whether a number is prime, such as the Lucas test and Proth's test .
These tests typically require factorization of n + 1, n − 1, or a similar quantity, which means that they are not useful for general-purpose primality testing, but they are often quite powerful when the tested number n is known to have a special form.
The Lucas test relies on the fact that the multiplicative order of a number a modulo n is n − 1 for a prime n when a is a primitive root modulo n .
If we can show a is primitive for n , we can show n is prime.
References    ^ a  b  Riesel (1994) pp.2-3   ^  John Selfridge#Selfridge's conjecture about primality testing .
^ a  b  c  d  e  Pomerance, Carl ; Selfridge, John L.
; Wagstaff, Samuel S.
Jr. (July 1980).
^  Baillie, Robert; Wagstaff, Samuel S.
Jr. (October 1980).
^  Baillie, Robert; Fiori, Andrew; Wagstaff, Samuel S.
Jr. (July 2021).
"Strengthening the Baillie-PSW Primality Test".
90 (330): 1931–1955.
arXiv : 2006.14425 .
doi : 10.1090/mcom/3616 .
S2CID  220055722 .
^ a  b  Adleman, Leonard M.
; Huang, Ming-Deh (1992).
Primality testing and Abelian varieties over finite field .
Lecture notes in mathematics.
1512.
Springer-Verlag .
ISBN  3-540-55308-8 .
^  Chau, H.
F.; Lo, H.-K.
(1995).
"Primality Test Via Quantum Factorization".
arXiv : quant-ph/9508005 .
^  Pocklington, H.
C.
(1914).
"The determination of the prime or composite nature of large numbers by Fermat's theorem".
Cambr.
Phil.
Proc .
18 : 29–30.
JFM  45.1250.02 .
^  Weisstein, Eric W.
 "Pocklington's Theorem" .
^  Gary L.
Miller (1976).
"Riemann's Hypothesis and Tests for Primality" .
Journal of Computer and System Sciences .
13 (3): 300–317.
doi : 10.1016/S0022-0000(76)80043-8 .
^ a  b  Agrawal, Manindra; Kayal, Neeraj; Saxena, Nitin (2004).
"Primes is in P"  (PDF) .
160 (2): 781–793.
doi : 10.4007/annals.2004.160.781 .
^  Agrawal, Manindra; Kayal, Neeraj; Saxena, Nitin (2004).
"PRIMES is in P"  (PDF) .
^  Carl Pomerance & Hendrik W.
Lenstra (July 20, 2005).
^  Popovych, Roman (December 30, 2008).
"A note on Agrawal conjecture"  (PDF) .
^  E.
Allender, M.
Saks, and I.E.
Shparlinski, A lower bound for primality, J.
Comp.
Syst.
Sci.
62 (2001), pp.
356–366.
Sources   Crandall, Richard ; Pomerance, Carl (2005).
ISBN  0-387-25282-7 .
Chapter 3: Recognizing Primes and Composites, pp.
109–158.
Chapter 4: Primality Proving, pp.
159–190.
Section 7.6: Elliptic curve primality proving (ECPP), pp.
334–340.
Knuth, Donald (1997).
"section 4.5.4".
The Art of Computer Programming .
2: Seminumerical Algorithms (3rd ed.).
Addison–Wesley.
391–396.
ISBN  0-201-89684-2 .
Cormen, Thomas H.
; Leiserson, Charles E.
; Rivest, Ronald L.
; Stein, Clifford (2001).
"Section 31.8: Primality testing".
Introduction to Algorithms (Second ed.).
MIT Press, McGraw–Hill.
887–896.
Papadimitriou, Christos H.
(1993).
"Section 10.2: Primality".
Computational Complexity (1st ed.).
Addison Wesley.
222 –227.
ISBN  0-201-53082-1 .
Zbl  0833.68049 .
Riesel, Hans (1994).
Prime Numbers and Computer Methods for Factorization .
Progress in Mathematics.
126 (second ed.).
Boston, Massachusetts: Birkhäuser.
ISBN  0-8176-3743-5 .
Zbl  0821.11001 .
External links  Solovay-Strassen (computacion.cs.cinvestav.mx) at archive.today (archived 2012-12-20) – Implementation of the Solovay-Strassen primality test in Maple  Distinguishing prime numbers from composite numbers, by D.J.
Bernstein (cr.yp.to)  The Prime Pages (primes.utm.edu)  Lucas Primality Test with Factored N − 1 (MathPages.com) at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2010-08-06)  PRIMABOINCA is a research project that uses Internet-connected computers to search for a counterexample to some conjectures.
The first conjecture ( Agrawal's conjecture ) was the basis for the formulation of the first deterministic prime test algorithm in polynomial time ( AKS algorithm ).
v t e Number-theoretic  algorithms Primality tests  AKS  APR  Baillie–PSW  Elliptic curve  Pocklington  Fermat  Lucas  Lucas–Lehmer  Lucas–Lehmer–Riesel  Proth's theorem  Pépin's  Quadratic Frobenius  Solovay–Strassen  Miller–Rabin  Prime-generating  Sieve of Atkin  Sieve of Eratosthenes  Sieve of Pritchard  Sieve of Sundaram  Wheel factorization  Integer factorization  Continued fraction (CFRAC)  Dixon's  Lenstra elliptic curve (ECM)  Euler's  Pollard's rho  p − 1  p + 1  Quadratic sieve (QS)  General number field sieve (GNFS)  Special number field sieve (SNFS)  Rational sieve  Fermat's  Shanks's square forms  Trial division  Shor's  Multiplication  Ancient Egyptian  Long  Karatsuba  Toom–Cook  Schönhage–Strassen  Fürer's  Euclidean  division  Binary  Chunking  Fourier  Goldschmidt  Newton-Raphson  Long  Short  SRT  Discrete logarithm  Baby-step giant-step  Pollard rho  Pollard kangaroo  Pohlig–Hellman  Index calculus  Function field sieve  Greatest common divisor  Binary  Euclidean  Extended Euclidean  Lehmer's  Modular square root  Cipolla  Pocklington's  Tonelli–Shanks  Berlekamp  Kunerth  Other algorithms  Chakravala  Cornacchia  Exponentiation by squaring  Integer square root  Integer relation ( LLL ; KZ )  Modular exponentiation  Montgomery reduction  Schoof  Trachtenberg system   Italics indicate that algorithm is for numbers of special forms   Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primality_test&oldid=1219323395 "Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
===Combinatorial proof===
{{Main|Combinatorial proof}}
A combinatorial proof establishes the equivalence of different expressions by showing that they count the same object in different ways.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "In mathematics , the term combinatorial proof is often used to mean either of two types of mathematical proof :  A proof by double counting .
A combinatorial  identity is proven by counting the number of elements of some carefully chosen set in two different ways to obtain the different expressions in the identity.
Since those expressions count the same objects, they must be equal to each other and thus the identity is established.
A bijective proof .
Two sets are shown to have the same number of members by exhibiting a bijection , i.e.
a one-to-one correspondence, between them.
The term "combinatorial proof" may also be used more broadly to refer to any kind of elementary proof in combinatorics.
However, as Glass (2003) writes in his review of Benjamin & Quinn (2003) (a book about combinatorial proofs), these two simple techniques are enough to prove many theorems in combinatorics and number theory .
Example  An archetypal double counting proof is for the well known formula for the number         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   of k - combinations (i.e., subsets of size k ) of an n -element set:        (    n  k    )     =     n  (  n  −  1  )  ⋯  (  n  −  k  +  1  )    k  (  k  −  1  )  ⋯  1     .
{\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k}}={\frac {n(n-1)\cdots (n-k+1)}{k(k-1)\cdots 1}}.}
Here a direct bijective proof is not possible: because the right-hand side of the identity is a fraction, there is no set obviously counted by it (it even takes some thought to see that the denominator always evenly divides the numerator).
However its numerator counts the Cartesian product of k finite sets of sizes n , n − 1 , ..., n − k + 1 , while its denominator counts the permutations of a k -element set (the set most obviously counted by the denominator would be another Cartesian product k finite sets; if desired one could map permutations to that set by an explicit bijection).
Now take S to be the set of sequences of k elements selected from our n -element set without repetition.
On one hand, there is an easy bijection of S with the Cartesian product corresponding to the numerator     n  (  n  −  1  )  ⋯  (  n  −  k  +  1  )    {\displaystyle n(n-1)\cdots (n-k+1)}   , and on the other hand there is a bijection from the set C of pairs of a k -combination and a permutation σ of k to S , by taking the elements of C in increasing order, and then permuting this sequence by σ to obtain an element of S .
The two ways of counting give the equation     n  (  n  −  1  )  ⋯  (  n  −  k  +  1  )  =     (    n  k    )     k  !
,    {\displaystyle n(n-1)\cdots (n-k+1)={\binom {n}{k}}k!,}   and after division by k !
this leads to the stated formula for         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   .
In general, if the counting formula involves a division, a similar double counting argument (if it exists) gives the most straightforward combinatorial proof of the identity, but double counting arguments are not limited to situations where the formula is of this form.
Here is a simpler, more informal combinatorial proof of the same identity:        (    n  k    )     k  !
=  n  !
{\displaystyle {\binom {n}{k}}k!(n-k)!=n!}
Suppose that n people would like to enter a museum, but the museum only has room for k people.
First choose which k people from among the n people will be allowed in.
There are         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   ways to do this by definition.
Now order the k people into a single-file line so that they may pay one at a time.
There are k !
ways to permute this set of size k .
Next, order the n − k people who must remain outside into a single-file line so that later they can enter one at a time, as the others leave.
There are ( n − k )!
ways to do this.
But now we have ordered the entire group of n people, something which can be done in n !
ways.
So both sides count the number of ways to order the n people.
Division yields the well-known formula for         (    n  k    )        {\displaystyle {\tbinom {n}{k}}}   .
The benefit of a combinatorial proof  Stanley (1997) gives an example of a combinatorial enumeration problem (counting the number of sequences of k subsets S 1 , S 2 , ...
S k , that can be formed from a set of n items such that the intersection of all the subsets is empty) with two different proofs for its solution.
The first proof, which is not combinatorial, uses mathematical induction and generating functions to find that the number of sequences of this type is (2 k −1) n .
The second proof is based on the observation that there are 2 k −1 proper subsets of the set {1, 2, ..., k }, and (2 k −1) n functions from the set {1, 2, ..., n } to the family of proper subsets of {1, 2, ..., k }.
The sequences to be counted can be placed in one-to-one correspondence with these functions, where the function formed from a given sequence of subsets maps each element i to the set { j | i ∈ S j }.
Stanley writes, “Not only is the above combinatorial proof much shorter than our previous proof, but also it makes the reason for the simple answer completely transparent.
It is often the case, as occurred here, that the first proof to come to mind turns out to be laborious and inelegant, but that the final answer suggests a simple combinatorial proof.” Due both to their frequent greater elegance than non-combinatorial proofs and the greater insight they provide into the structures they describe, Stanley formulates a general principle that combinatorial proofs are to be preferred over other proofs, and lists as exercises many problems of finding combinatorial proofs for mathematical facts known to be true through other means.
The difference between bijective and double counting proofs  Stanley does not clearly distinguish between bijective and double counting proofs, and gives examples of both kinds, but the difference between the two types of combinatorial proof can be seen in an example provided by Aigner & Ziegler (1998) , of proofs for Cayley's formula stating that there are n n − 2 different trees that can be formed from a given set of n nodes.
Aigner and Ziegler list four proofs of this theorem, the first of which is bijective and the last of which is a double counting argument.
They also mention but do not describe the details of a fifth bijective proof.
The most natural way to find a bijective proof of this formula would be to find a bijection between n -node trees and some collection of objects that has n n − 2 members, such as the sequences of n − 2 values each in the range from 1 to n .
Such a bijection can be obtained using the Prüfer sequence of each tree.
Any tree can be uniquely encoded into a Prüfer sequence, and any Prüfer sequence can be uniquely decoded into a tree; these two results together provide a bijective proof of Cayley's formula.
An alternative bijective proof, given by Aigner and Ziegler and credited by them to André Joyal , involves a bijection between, on the one hand, n -node trees with two designated nodes (that may be the same as each other), and on the other hand, n -node directed  pseudoforests .
If there are T n  n -node trees, then there are n 2 T n trees with two designated nodes.
And a pseudoforest may be determined by specifying, for each of its nodes, the endpoint of the edge extending outwards from that node; there are n possible choices for the endpoint of a single edge (allowing self-loops) and therefore n n possible pseudoforests.
By finding a bijection between trees with two labeled nodes and pseudoforests, Joyal's proof shows that T n = n n − 2 .
Finally, the fourth proof of Cayley's formula presented by Aigner and Ziegler is a double counting proof due to Jim Pitman .
In this proof, Pitman considers the sequences of directed edges that may be added to an n -node empty graph to form from it a single rooted tree, and counts the number of such sequences in two different ways.
By showing how to derive a sequence of this type by choosing a tree, a root for the tree, and an ordering for the edges in the tree, he shows that there are T n n !
possible sequences of this type.
And by counting the number of ways in which a partial sequence can be extended by a single edge, he shows that there are n n − 2 n !
possible sequences.
Equating these two different formulas for the size of the same set of edge sequences and cancelling the common factor of n !
leads to Cayley's formula.
Related concepts  The principles of double counting and bijection used in combinatorial proofs can be seen as examples of a larger family of combinatorial principles , which include also other ideas such as the pigeonhole principle .
Proving an identity combinatorially can be viewed as adding more structure to the identity by replacing numbers by sets; similarly, categorification is the replacement of sets by categories.
References  Aigner, Martin; Ziegler, Günter M.
(1998), Proofs from THE BOOK , Springer-Verlag , pp.
141–146, ISBN  3-540-40460-0 .
Benjamin, Arthur T.
; Quinn, Jennifer J.
(2003), Proofs that Really Count: The Art of Combinatorial Proof , Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, vol.
27, Mathematical Association of America , ISBN  978-0-88385-333-7 .
Glass, Darren (2003), Read This: Proofs that Really Count , Mathematical Association of America .
Stanley, Richard P.
(1997), Enumerative Combinatorics, Volume I , Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol.
49, Cambridge University Press, pp.
11–12, ISBN  0-521-55309-1 .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Combinatorial_proof&oldid=1156572539 "One-to-one correspondence    A bijective function, f : X → Y , where set X is {1, 2, 3, 4} and set Y is {A, B, C, D}.
For example, f (1) = D.
 Function x ↦ f ( x )  History of the function concept Examples of domains and codomains       X    {\displaystyle X}    →       B     {\displaystyle \mathbb {B} }   ,       B     {\displaystyle \mathbb {B} }    →      X    {\displaystyle X}   ,        B    n      {\displaystyle \mathbb {B} ^{n}}    →      X    {\displaystyle X}        X    {\displaystyle X}    →       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   ,       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }    →      X    {\displaystyle X}        X    {\displaystyle X}    →       R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   ,       R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }    →      X    {\displaystyle X}   ,        R    n      {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{n}}    →      X    {\displaystyle X}        X    {\displaystyle X}    →       C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }   ,       C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }    →      X    {\displaystyle X}   ,        C    n      {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} ^{n}}    →      X    {\displaystyle X}      Classes/properties    Constant  Identity  Linear  Polynomial  Rational  Algebraic  Analytic  Smooth  Continuous  Measurable  Injective  Surjective  Bijective   Constructions   Restriction  Composition  λ  Inverse   Generalizations   Binary relation  Partial  Multivalued  Implicit  Space   v t e  A bijection , bijective function , or one-to-one correspondence between two mathematical sets is a function such that each element of the second set (the codomain ) is mapped to from exactly one element of the first set (the domain ).
Equivalently, a bijection is a relation between two sets such that each element of either set is paired with exactly one element of the other set.
A function is bijective if and only if it is invertible ; that is, a function     f  :  X  →  Y    {\displaystyle f:X\to Y}   is bijective if and only if there is a function     g  :  Y  →  X  ,    {\displaystyle g:Y\to X,}   the inverse of f , such that each of the two ways for composing the two functions produces an identity function :     g  (  f  (  x  )  )  =  x    {\displaystyle g(f(x))=x}   for each     x    {\displaystyle x}   in     X    {\displaystyle X}   and     f  (  g  (  y  )  )  =  y    {\displaystyle f(g(y))=y}   for each     y    {\displaystyle y}   in     Y  .
{\displaystyle Y.}
For example, the multiplication by two defines a bijection from the integers to the even numbers , which has the division by two as its inverse function.
A function is bijective if and only if it is both injective (or one-to-one )—meaning that each element in the codomain is mapped to from at most one element of the domain—and surjective (or onto )—meaning that each element of the codomain is mapped to from at least one element of the domain.
The term one-to-one correspondence must not be confused with one-to-one function .
The elementary operation of counting establishes a bijection from some finite set to the first natural numbers  (1, 2, 3, ...) , up to the number of elements in the counted set.
It results that two finite sets have the same number of elements if and only if there exists a bijection between them.
More generally, two sets are said to have the same cardinal number if there exists a bijection between them.
A bijective function from a set to itself is also called a permutation ,  and the set of all permutations of a set forms its symmetric group .
Some bijections with further properties have received specific names, which include automorphisms , isomorphisms , homeomorphisms , diffeomorphisms , permutation groups , and most geometric transformations .
Galois correspondences are bijections between sets of mathematical objects of apparently very different nature.
Definition   For a binary relation pairing elements of set X with elements of set Y to be a bijection, four properties must hold:  each element of X must be paired with at least one element of Y ,  no element of X may be paired with more than one element of Y ,  each element of Y must be paired with at least one element of X , and  no element of Y may be paired with more than one element of X .
Satisfying properties (1) and (2) means that a pairing is a function with domain  X .
It is more common to see properties (1) and (2) written as a single statement: Every element of X is paired with exactly one element of Y .
Functions which satisfy property (3) are said to be " onto  Y " and are called surjections (or surjective functions ).
Functions which satisfy property (4) are said to be " one-to-one functions " and are called injections (or injective functions ).
With this terminology, a bijection is a function which is both a surjection and an injection, or using other words, a bijection is a function which is both "one-to-one" and "onto".
Examples   Batting line-up of a baseball or cricket team   Consider the batting line-up of a baseball or cricket team (or any list of all the players of any sports team where every player holds a specific spot in a line-up).
The set X will be the players on the team (of size nine in the case of baseball) and the set Y will be the positions in the batting order (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.)
The "pairing" is given by which player is in what position in this order.
Property (1) is satisfied since each player is somewhere in the list.
Property (2) is satisfied since no player bats in two (or more) positions in the order.
Property (3) says that for each position in the order, there is some player batting in that position and property (4) states that two or more players are never batting in the same position in the list.
Seats and students of a classroom   In a classroom there are a certain number of seats.
A bunch of students enter the room and the instructor asks them to be seated.
After a quick look around the room, the instructor declares that there is a bijection between the set of students and the set of seats, where each student is paired with the seat they are sitting in.
What the instructor observed in order to reach this conclusion was that:  Every student was in a seat (there was no one standing),  No student was in more than one seat,  Every seat had someone sitting there (there were no empty seats), and  No seat had more than one student in it.
The instructor was able to conclude that there were just as many seats as there were students, without having to count either set.
More mathematical examples   A bijection from the natural numbers to the integers , which maps 2 n to − n and 2 n − 1 to n , for n ≥ 0.
For any set X , the identity function  1 X : X → X , 1 X ( x ) = x is bijective.
The function f : R → R , f ( x ) = 2 x + 1 is bijective, since for each y there is a unique x = ( y − 1)/2 such that f ( x ) = y .
More generally, any linear function over the reals, f : R → R , f ( x ) = ax + b (where a is non-zero) is a bijection.
Each real number y is obtained from (or paired with) the real number x = ( y − b )/ a .
The function f : R → (−π/2, π/2), given by f ( x ) = arctan( x ) is bijective, since each real number x is paired with exactly one angle y in the interval (−π/2, π/2) so that tan( y ) = x (that is, y = arctan( x )).
If the codomain (−π/2, π/2) was made larger to include an integer multiple of π/2, then this function would no longer be onto (surjective), since there is no real number which could be paired with the multiple of π/2 by this arctan function.
The exponential function , g : R → R , g ( x ) = e x , is not bijective: for instance, there is no x in R such that g ( x ) = −1, showing that g is not onto (surjective).
However, if the codomain is restricted to the positive real numbers       R    +    ≡   (   0  ,  ∞   )     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{+}\equiv \left(0,\infty \right)}   , then g would be bijective; its inverse (see below) is the natural logarithm function ln.
The function h : R → R + , h ( x ) = x 2 is not bijective: for instance, h (−1) = h (1) = 1, showing that h is not one-to-one (injective).
However, if the domain is restricted to       R    0    +    ≡     A bijection f with domain X (indicated by f : X → Y in functional notation ) also defines a converse relation starting in Y and going to X (by turning the arrows around).
The process of "turning the arrows around" for an arbitrary function does not, in general , yield a function, but properties (3) and (4) of a bijection say that this inverse relation is a function with domain Y .
Moreover, properties (1) and (2) then say that this inverse function is a surjection and an injection, that is, the inverse function exists and is also a bijection.
Functions that have inverse functions are said to be invertible .
A function is invertible if and only if it is a bijection.
Stated in concise mathematical notation, a function f : X → Y is bijective if and only if it satisfies the condition  for every y in Y there is a unique x in X with y = f ( x ).
Continuing with the baseball batting line-up example, the function that is being defined takes as input the name of one of the players and outputs the position of that player in the batting order.
Since this function is a bijection, it has an inverse function which takes as input a position in the batting order and outputs the player who will be batting in that position.
Composition   A bijection composed of an injection (X → Y) and a surjection (Y → Z).
The composition      g   ∘   f    {\displaystyle g\,\circ \,f}   of two bijections f : X → Y and g : Y → Z is a bijection, whose inverse is given by     g   ∘   f    {\displaystyle g\,\circ \,f}   is     (  g   ∘   f   )   −  1     =   (   f   −  1    )   ∘   (   g   −  1    )    {\displaystyle (g\,\circ \,f)^{-1}\;=\;(f^{-1})\,\circ \,(g^{-1})}   .
Conversely, if the composition     g   ∘   f    {\displaystyle g\,\circ \,f}   of two functions is bijective, it only follows that f is injective and g is surjective .
Cardinality   If X and Y are finite sets , then there exists a bijection between the two sets X and Y  if and only if  X and Y have the same number of elements.
Indeed, in axiomatic set theory , this is taken as the definition of "same number of elements" ( equinumerosity ), and generalising this definition to infinite sets leads to the concept of cardinal number , a way to distinguish the various sizes of infinite sets.
Properties   A function f : R → R is bijective if and only if its graph meets every horizontal and vertical line exactly once.
If X is a set, then the bijective functions from X to itself, together with the operation of functional composition (∘), form a group , the symmetric group of X , which is denoted variously by S( X ), S X , or X !
( X  factorial ).
Bijections preserve cardinalities of sets: for a subset A of the domain with cardinality | A | and subset B of the codomain with cardinality | B |, one has the following equalities: | f ( A )| = | A | and | f −1 ( B )| = | B |.
If X and Y are finite sets with the same cardinality, and f : X → Y , then the following are equivalent: f is a bijection.
f is a surjection .
f is an injection .
For a finite set S , there is a bijection between the set of possible total orderings of the elements and the set of bijections from S to S .
That is to say, the number of permutations of elements of S is the same as the number of total orderings of that set—namely, n !.
Category theory   Bijections are precisely the isomorphisms in the category  Set of sets and set functions.
However, the bijections are not always the isomorphisms for more complex categories.
For example, in the category Grp of groups , the morphisms must be homomorphisms since they must preserve the group structure, so the isomorphisms are group isomorphisms which are bijective homomorphisms.
Generalization to partial functions   The notion of one-to-one correspondence generalizes to partial functions , where they are called partial bijections , although partial bijections are only required to be injective.
The reason for this relaxation is that a (proper) partial function is already undefined for a portion of its domain; thus there is no compelling reason to constrain its inverse to be a total function , i.e.
defined everywhere on its domain.
The set of all partial bijections on a given base set is called the symmetric inverse semigroup .
Another way of defining the same notion is to say that a partial bijection from A to B is any relation R (which turns out to be a partial function) with the property that R is the graph of a bijection f : A′ → B′ , where A′ is a subset of A and B′ is a subset of B .
When the partial bijection is on the same set, it is sometimes called a one-to-one partial transformation .
An example is the Möbius transformation simply defined on the complex plane, rather than its completion to the extended complex plane.
Gallery      An injective non-surjective function (injection, not a bijection)     An injective surjective function ( bijection )     A non-injective surjective function (surjection, not a bijection)     A non-injective non-surjective function (also not a bijection)   This article is about what mathematicians call "intuitive" or "naive" set theory.
For a more detailed account, see Naive set theory .
For a rigorous modern axiomatic treatment of sets, see Set theory .
Collection of mathematical objects  A set of polygons in an Euler diagram  This set equals the one depicted above since both have the very same elements.
In mathematics , a set is a collection of different  things;    these things are called elements or members of the set and are typically mathematical objects of any kind: numbers, symbols, points in space, lines, other geometrical shapes, variables, or even other sets.
A set may have a finite number of elements or be an infinite set .
There is a unique set with no elements, called the empty set ; a set with a single element is a singleton .
Sets are uniquely characterized by their elements; this means that two sets that have precisely the same elements are equal (they are the same set).
This property is called extensionality .
In particular, this implies that there is only one empty set.
Sets are ubiquitous in modern mathematics.
Indeed, set theory , more specifically Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory , has been the standard way to provide rigorous foundations for all branches of mathematics since the first half of the 20th century.
Definition and notation   Mathematical texts commonly denote sets by capital letters   in italic , such as A , B , C .
A set may also be called a collection or family , especially when its elements are themselves sets.
Roster notation   Roster or enumeration notation defines a set by listing its elements between curly brackets , separated by commas:       A = {4, 2, 1, 3}  B = {blue, white, red} .
This notation was introduced by Ernst Zermelo in 1908.
In a set, all that matters is whether each element is in it or not, so the ordering of the elements in roster notation is irrelevant (in contrast, in a sequence , a tuple , or a permutation of a set, the ordering of the terms matters).
For example, {2, 4, 6} and {4, 6, 4, 2} represent the same set.
For sets with many elements, especially those following an implicit pattern, the list of members can be abbreviated using an ellipsis ' ...
'.
For instance, the set of the first thousand positive integers may be specified in roster notation as  {1, 2, 3, ..., 1000} .
Infinite sets in roster notation   An infinite set is a set with an endless list of elements.
To describe an infinite set in roster notation, an ellipsis is placed at the end of the list, or at both ends, to indicate that the list continues forever.
For example, the set of nonnegative integers is  {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ...} ,  and the set of all integers is  {..., −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...} .
Semantic definition   Another way to define a set is to use a rule to determine what the elements are:  Let A be the set whose members are the first four positive integers .
Let B be the set of colors of the French flag .
Such a definition is called a semantic description .
Set-builder notation   Main article: Set-builder notation  Set-builder notation specifies a set as a selection from a larger set, determined by a condition on the elements.
For example, a set F can be defined as follows:     F  =  {  n  ∣  n   is an integer, and   0  ≤  n  ≤  19  }  .
{\displaystyle F=\{n\mid n{\text{ is an integer, and }}0\leq n\leq 19\}.}
In this notation, the vertical bar "|" means "such that", and the description can be interpreted as " F is the set of all numbers n such that n is an integer in the range from 0 to 19 inclusive".
Some authors use a colon ":" instead of the vertical bar.
Classifying methods of definition   Philosophy uses specific terms to classify types of definitions:  An intensional definition uses a rule to determine membership.
Semantic definitions and definitions using set-builder notation are examples.
An extensional definition describes a set by listing all its elements .
Such definitions are also called enumerative .
An ostensive definition is one that describes a set by giving examples of elements; a roster involving an ellipsis would be an example.
Membership   Main article: Element (mathematics)  If B is a set and x is an element of B , this is written in shorthand as x ∈ B , which can also be read as " x belongs to B ", or " x is in B ".
The statement " y is not an element of B " is written as y ∉ B , which can also be read as " y is not in B ".
For example, with respect to the sets A = {1, 2, 3, 4} , B = {blue, white, red} , and F = { n | n is an integer, and 0 ≤ n ≤ 19} ,  4 ∈ A and 12 ∈ F ; and  20 ∉ F and green ∉ B .
The empty set   Main article: Empty set  The empty set (or null set ) is the unique set that has no members.
It is denoted ∅ ,     ∅    {\displaystyle \emptyset }   , { },    ϕ ,  or ϕ .
Singleton sets   Main article: Singleton (mathematics)  A singleton set is a set with exactly one element; such a set may also be called a unit set .
Any such set can be written as { x }, where x is the element.
The set { x } and the element x mean different things; Halmos  draws the analogy that a box containing a hat is not the same as the hat.
Subsets   Main article: Subset  If every element of set A is also in B , then A is described as being a subset of B , or contained in B , written A ⊆ B ,  or B ⊇ A .
The latter notation may be read B contains A , B includes A , or B is a superset of A .
The relationship between sets established by ⊆ is called inclusion or containment .
Two sets are equal if they contain each other: A ⊆ B and B ⊆ A is equivalent to A = B .
If A is a subset of B , but A is not equal to B , then A is called a proper subset of B .
This can be written A ⊊ B .
Likewise, B ⊋ A means B is a proper superset of A , i.e.
B contains A , and is not equal to A .
A third pair of operators ⊂ and ⊃ are used differently by different authors: some authors use A ⊂ B and B ⊃ A to mean A is any subset of B (and not necessarily a proper subset),   while others reserve A ⊂ B and B ⊃ A for cases where A is a proper subset of B .
Examples:  The set of all humans is a proper subset of the set of all mammals.
{1, 3} ⊂ {1, 2, 3, 4}.
{1, 2, 3, 4} ⊆ {1, 2, 3, 4}.
The empty set is a subset of every set,  and every set is a subset of itself:    ∅ ⊆ A .
A ⊆ A .
Euler and Venn diagrams   A is a subset of B .
B is a superset of A .
An Euler diagram is a graphical representation of a collection of sets; each set is depicted as a planar region enclosed by a loop, with its elements inside.
If A is a subset of B , then the region representing A is completely inside the region representing B .
If two sets have no elements in common, the regions do not overlap.
A Venn diagram , in contrast, is a graphical representation of n sets in which the n loops divide the plane into 2 n zones such that for each way of selecting some of the n sets (possibly all or none), there is a zone for the elements that belong to all the selected sets and none of the others.
For example, if the sets are A , B , and C , there should be a zone for the elements that are inside A and C and outside B (even if such elements do not exist).
Special sets of numbers in mathematics   The natural numbers       N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   are contained in the integers       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , which are contained in the rational numbers       Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   , which are contained in the real numbers       R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   , which are contained in the complex numbers       C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }    There are sets of such mathematical importance, to which mathematicians refer so frequently, that they have acquired special names and notational conventions to identify them.
Many of these important sets are represented in mathematical texts using bold (e.g.
Z     {\displaystyle \mathbf {Z} }   ) or blackboard bold (e.g.
Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   ) typeface.
These include       N     {\displaystyle \mathbf {N} }   or      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   , the set of all natural numbers :      N   =  {  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  .
{\displaystyle \mathbf {N} =\{0,1,2,3,...\}}   (often, authors exclude 0 );        Z     {\displaystyle \mathbf {Z} }   or      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , the set of all integers (whether positive, negative or zero):      Z   =  {  .
,  −  2  ,  −  1  ,  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  .
{\displaystyle \mathbf {Z} =\{...,-2,-1,0,1,2,3,...\}}   ;        Q     {\displaystyle \mathbf {Q} }   or      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   , the set of all rational numbers (that is, the set of all proper and improper fractions ):      Q   =   {     a  b    ∣  a  ,  b  ∈   Z   ,  b  ≠  0   }     {\displaystyle \mathbf {Q} =\left\{{\frac {a}{b}}\mid a,b\in \mathbf {Z} ,b\neq 0\right\}}   .
For example, − 7 / 4 ∈ Q and 5 = 5 / 1 ∈ Q ;        R     {\displaystyle \mathbf {R} }   or      R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   , the set of all real numbers , including all rational numbers and all irrational numbers (which include algebraic numbers such as       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   that cannot be rewritten as fractions, as well as transcendental numbers such as π and e );        C     {\displaystyle \mathbf {C} }   or      C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }   , the set of all complex numbers : C = { a + bi | a , b ∈ R } , for example, 1 + 2 i ∈ C .
Each of the above sets of numbers has an infinite number of elements.
Each is a subset of the sets listed below it.
Sets of positive or negative numbers are sometimes denoted by superscript plus and minus signs, respectively.
For example,       Q    +      {\displaystyle \mathbf {Q} ^{+}}   represents the set of positive rational numbers.
Functions   A function (or mapping ) from a set A to a set B is a rule that assigns to each "input" element of A an "output" that is an element of B ; more formally, a function is a special kind of relation , one that relates each element of A to exactly one element of B .
A function is called  injective (or one-to-one) if it maps any two different elements of A to different elements of B ,  surjective (or onto) if for every element of B , there is at least one element of A that maps to it, and  bijective (or a one-to-one correspondence) if the function is both injective and surjective — in this case, each element of A is paired with a unique element of B , and each element of B is paired with a unique element of A , so that there are no unpaired elements.
An injective function is called an injection , a surjective function is called a surjection , and a bijective function is called a bijection or one-to-one correspondence .
Cardinality   Main article: Cardinality  The cardinality of a set S , denoted | S | , is the number of members of S .
For example, if B = {blue, white, red} , then | B | = 3 .
Repeated members in roster notation are not counted,   so | {blue, white, red, blue, white} | = 3 , too.
More formally, two sets share the same cardinality if there exists a bijection between them.
The cardinality of the empty set is zero.
Infinite sets and infinite cardinality   The list of elements of some sets is endless, or infinite .
For example, the set      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   of natural numbers is infinite.
In fact, all the special sets of numbers mentioned in the section above are infinite.
Infinite sets have infinite cardinality .
Some infinite cardinalities are greater than others.
Arguably one of the most significant results from set theory is that the set of real numbers has greater cardinality than the set of natural numbers.
Sets with cardinality less than or equal to that of      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   are called countable sets ; these are either finite sets or countably infinite sets (sets of the same cardinality as      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   ); some authors use "countable" to mean "countably infinite".
Sets with cardinality strictly greater than that of      N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   are called uncountable sets .
However, it can be shown that the cardinality of a straight line (i.e., the number of points on a line) is the same as the cardinality of any segment of that line, of the entire plane , and indeed of any finite-dimensional  Euclidean space .
The continuum hypothesis   Main article: Continuum hypothesis  The continuum hypothesis, formulated by Georg Cantor in 1878, is the statement that there is no set with cardinality strictly between the cardinality of the natural numbers and the cardinality of a straight line.
In 1963, Paul Cohen proved that the continuum hypothesis is independent of the axiom system ZFC consisting of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice .
(ZFC is the most widely-studied version of axiomatic set theory.)
Power sets   Main article: Power set  The power set of a set S is the set of all subsets of S .
The empty set and S itself are elements of the power set of S , because these are both subsets of S .
For example, the power set of {1, 2, 3} is {∅, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}} .
The power set of a set S is commonly written as P ( S ) or 2 S .
If S has n elements, then P ( S ) has 2 n elements.
For example, {1, 2, 3} has three elements, and its power set has 2 3 = 8 elements, as shown above.
If S is infinite (whether countable or uncountable ), then P ( S ) is uncountable.
Moreover, the power set is always strictly "bigger" than the original set, in the sense that any attempt to pair up the elements of S with the elements of P ( S ) will leave some elements of P ( S ) unpaired.
(There is never a bijection from S onto P ( S ) .)
Partitions   Main article: Partition of a set  A partition of a set  S is a set of nonempty subsets of S , such that every element x in S is in exactly one of these subsets.
That is, the subsets are pairwise disjoint (meaning any two sets of the partition contain no element in common), and the union of all the subsets of the partition is S .
Basic operations   Main article: Algebra of sets  The complement of A in U  Suppose that a universal set  U (a set containing all elements being discussed) has been fixed, and that A is a subset of U .
The complement of A is the set of all elements (of U ) that do not belong to A .
It may be denoted A c or A ′ .
In set-builder notation,      A   c    =  {  a  ∈  U  :  a  ∉  A  }    {\displaystyle A^{\text{c}}=\{a\in U:a\notin A\}}   .
The complement may also be called the absolute complement to distinguish it from the relative complement below.
Example: If the universal set is taken to be the set of integers, then the complement of the set of even integers is the set of odd integers.
The union of A and B , denoted A ∪ B  The intersection of A and B , denoted A ∩ B  The set difference  A \ B  The symmetric difference of A and B  Given any two sets A and B ,  their union  A ∪ B is the set of all things that are members of A or B or both.
their intersection  A ∩ B is the set of all things that are members of both A and B .
If A ∩ B = ∅ , then A and B are said to be disjoint .
the set difference  A \ B (also written A − B ) is the set of all things that belong to A but not B .
Especially when B is a subset of A , it is also called the relative complement of B in A .
With B c as the absolute complement of B (in the universal set U ), A \ B = A ∩ B c .
their symmetric difference  A Δ B is the set of all things that belong to A or B but not both.
One has     A   Δ   B  =  (  A  ∖  B  )  ∪  (  B  ∖  A  )    {\displaystyle A\,\Delta \,B=(A\setminus B)\cup (B\setminus A)}   .
their cartesian product  A × B is the set of all ordered pairs  ( a , b ) such that a is an element of A and b is an element of B .
Examples:  {1, 2, 3} ∪ {3, 4, 5} = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }.
{1, 2, 3} ∩ {3, 4, 5} = {3 }.
{1, 2, 3} − {3, 4, 5} = {1, 2 }.
{1, 2, 3} Δ {3, 4, 5} = {1, 2, 4, 5 }.
{ a , b } × {1, 2, 3} = {( a ,1), ( a ,2), ( a ,3), ( b ,1), ( b ,2), ( b ,3) }.
The operations above satisfy many identities.
For example, one of De Morgan's laws states that ( A ∪ B )′ = A ′ ∩ B ′ (that is, the elements outside the union of A and B are the elements that are outside A  and outside B ).
The cardinality of A × B is the product of the cardinalities of A and B .
(This is an elementary fact when A and B are finite.
When one or both are infinite, multiplication of cardinal numbers is defined to make this true.)
The power set of any set becomes a Boolean ring with symmetric difference as the addition of the ring and intersection as the multiplication of the ring.
Applications   Sets are ubiquitous in modern mathematics.
For example, structures in abstract algebra , such as groups , fields and rings , are sets closed under one or more operations.
One of the main applications of naive set theory is in the construction of relations .
A relation from a domain  A to a codomain  B is a subset of the Cartesian product A × B .
For example, considering the set S = {rock, paper, scissors} of shapes in the game of the same name, the relation "beats" from S to S is the set B = {(scissors,paper), (paper,rock), (rock,scissors)} ; thus x beats y in the game if the pair ( x , y ) is a member of B .
Another example is the set F of all pairs ( x , x 2 ) , where x is real.
This relation is a subset of R × R , because the set of all squares is subset of the set of all real numbers.
Since for every x in R , one and only one pair ( x ,...) is found in F , it is called a function .
In functional notation, this relation can be written as F ( x ) = x 2 .
Principle of inclusion and exclusion   Main article: Inclusion–exclusion principle  The inclusion-exclusion principle for two finite sets states that the size of their union is the sum of the sizes of the sets minus the size of their intersection.
The inclusion–exclusion principle is a technique for counting the elements in a union of two finite sets in terms of the sizes of the two sets and their intersection.
It can be expressed symbolically as      |   A  ∪  B   |   =   |   A   |   +   |   B   |   −   |   A  ∩  B   |   .
{\displaystyle |A\cup B|=|A|+|B|-|A\cap B|.}
A more general form of the principle gives the cardinality of any finite union of finite sets:          |    A   1    ∪   A   2    ∪   A   3    ∪  …  ∪   A   n     |   =     (    |   A   1    |   +   |   A   2    |   +   |   A   3    |   +  …   |   A   n    |    )           −   (    |    A   1    ∩   A   2     |   +   |    A   1    ∩   A   3     |   +  …   |    A   n  −  1    ∩   A   n     |    )           +  …          +    (   −  1   )    n  −  1     (   |    A   1    ∩   A   2    ∩   A   3    ∩  …  ∩   A   n     |   )   .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\left|A_{1}\cup A_{2}\cup A_{3}\cup \ldots \cup A_{n}\right|=&\left(\left|A_{1}\right|+\left|A_{2}\right|+\left|A_{3}\right|+\ldots \left|A_{n}\right|\right)\\&{}-\left(\left|A_{1}\cap A_{2}\right|+\left|A_{1}\cap A_{3}\right|+\ldots \left|A_{n-1}\cap A_{n}\right|\right)\\&{}+\ldots \\&{}+\left(-1\right)^{n-1}\left(\left|A_{1}\cap A_{2}\cap A_{3}\cap \ldots \cap A_{n}\right|\right).\end{aligned}}}      History   Main article: Set theory The concept of a set emerged in mathematics at the end of the 19th century.
The German word for set, Menge , was coined by Bernard Bolzano in his work Paradoxes of the Infinite .
Passage with a translation of the original set definition of Georg Cantor.
The German word Menge for set is translated with aggregate here.
Georg Cantor , one of the founders of set theory,   gave the following definition at the beginning of his Beiträge zur Begründung der transfiniten Mengenlehre :    A set is a gathering together into a whole of definite, distinct objects of our perception or our thought—which are called elements of the set.
Bertrand Russell introduced the distinction between a set and a class (a set is a class, but some classes, such as the class of all sets, are not sets; see Russell's paradox ):    When mathematicians deal with what they call a manifold, aggregate, Menge , ensemble , or some equivalent name, it is  common, especially where the number of terms involved is finite, to regard the object in question (which is in fact a class) as defined by the enumeration of its terms, and as consisting possibly of a single term, which in that case is the class.
Naive set theory   Main article: Naive set theory  The foremost property of a set is that it can have elements, also called members .
Two sets are equal when they have the same elements.
More precisely, sets A and B are equal if every element of A is an element of B , and every element of B is an element of A ; this property is called the extensionality of sets .
The simple concept of a set has proved enormously useful in mathematics, but paradoxes arise if no restrictions are placed on how sets can be constructed:  Russell's paradox shows that the "set of all sets that do not contain themselves ", i.e., { x | x is a set and x ∉ x }, cannot exist.
Cantor's paradox shows that "the set of all sets" cannot exist.
Naïve set theory defines a set as any well-defined collection of distinct elements, but problems arise from the vagueness of the term well-defined .
Axiomatic set theory   In subsequent efforts to resolve these paradoxes since the time of the original formulation of naïve set theory, the properties of sets have been defined by axioms .
Axiomatic set theory takes the concept of a set as a primitive notion .
The purpose of the axioms is to provide a basic framework from which to deduce the truth or falsity of particular mathematical propositions (statements) about sets, using first-order logic .
According to Gödel's incompleteness theorems however, it is not possible to use first-order logic to prove any such particular axiomatic set theory is free from paradox.
Type of proof technique  In combinatorics , double counting , also called counting in two ways , is a combinatorial proof technique for showing that two expressions are equal by demonstrating that they are two ways of counting the size of one set .
In this technique, which van Lint & Wilson (2001) call "one of the most important tools in combinatorics",  one describes a finite set from two perspectives leading to two distinct expressions for the size of the set.
Since both expressions equal the size of the same set, they equal each other.
Examples   Multiplication (of natural numbers) commutes   This is a simple example of double counting, often used when teaching multiplication to young children.
In this context, multiplication of natural numbers is introduced as repeated addition, and is then shown to be commutative by counting,  in two different ways, a number of items arranged in a rectangular grid.
Suppose the grid has     n    {\displaystyle n}   rows and     m    {\displaystyle m}   columns.
We first count the items by summing     n    {\displaystyle n}   rows of     m    {\displaystyle m}   items each, then a second time by summing     m    {\displaystyle m}   columns of     n    {\displaystyle n}   items each, thus showing that, for these particular values of     n    {\displaystyle n}   and     m    {\displaystyle m}   ,     n  ×  m  =  m  ×  n    {\displaystyle n\times m=m\times n}   .
Forming committees   One example of the double counting method counts the number of ways in which a committee can be formed from     n    {\displaystyle n}   people, allowing any number of the people (even zero of them) to be part of the committee.
That is, one counts the number of subsets that an     n    {\displaystyle n}   -element set may have.
One method for forming a committee is to ask each person to choose whether or not to join it.
Each person has two choices – yes or no – and these choices are independent of those of the other people.
Therefore there are     2  ×  2  ×  ⋯  2  =   2   n      {\displaystyle 2\times 2\times \cdots 2=2^{n}}   possibilities.
Alternatively, one may observe that the size of the committee must be some number between 0 and     n    {\displaystyle n}   .
For each possible size     k    {\displaystyle k}   , the number of ways in which a committee of     k    {\displaystyle k}   people can be formed from     n    {\displaystyle n}   people is the binomial coefficient         (    n  k    )     .
{\displaystyle {n \choose k}.}
Therefore the total number of possible committees is the sum of binomial coefficients over     k  =  0  ,  1  ,  2  ,  …  ,  n    {\displaystyle k=0,1,2,\dots ,n}   .
Equating the two expressions gives the identity       ∑   k  =  0    n       (    n  k    )     =   2   n    ,    {\displaystyle \sum _{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}=2^{n},}   a special case of the binomial theorem .
A similar double counting method can be used to prove the more general identity        ∑   k  =  d    n       (    n  k    )        (    k  d    )     =   2   n  −  d       (    n  d    )       {\displaystyle \sum _{k=d}^{n}{n \choose k}{k \choose d}=2^{n-d}{n \choose d}}     Handshaking lemma   Main article: Handshaking lemma  Another theorem that is commonly proven with a double counting argument states that every undirected graph contains an even number of vertices of odd degree .
That is, the number of vertices that have an odd number of incident edges must be even.
In more colloquial terms, in a party of people some of whom shake hands, an even number of people must have shaken an odd number of other people's hands; for this reason, the result is known as the handshaking lemma .
To prove this by double counting, let     d  (  v  )    {\displaystyle d(v)}   be the degree of vertex     v    {\displaystyle v}   .
The number of vertex-edge incidences in the graph may be counted in two different ways: by summing the degrees of the vertices, or by counting two incidences for every edge.
Therefore      ∑   v    d  (  v  )  =  2  e    {\displaystyle \sum _{v}d(v)=2e}   where     e    {\displaystyle e}   is the number of edges.
The sum of the degrees of the vertices is therefore an even number , which could not happen if an odd number of the vertices had odd degree.
This fact, with this proof, appears in the 1736 paper of Leonhard Euler on the Seven Bridges of Königsberg that first began the study of graph theory .
Counting trees   Cayley's formula implies that there is 1 = 2 2 − 2 tree on two vertices, 3 = 3 3 − 2 trees on three vertices, and 16 = 4 4 − 2 trees on four vertices.
Adding a directed edge to a rooted forest  What is the number      T   n      {\displaystyle T_{n}}   of different trees that can be formed from a set of     n    {\displaystyle n}   distinct vertices?
Cayley's formula gives the answer      T   n    =   n   n  −  2      {\displaystyle T_{n}=n^{n-2}}   .
Aigner & Ziegler (1998) list four proofs of this fact; they write of the fourth, a double counting proof due to Jim Pitman, that it is "the most beautiful of them all."
Pitman's proof counts in two different ways the number of different sequences of directed edges that can be added to an empty graph on     n    {\displaystyle n}   vertices to form from it a rooted tree .
The directed edges point away from the root.
One way to form such a sequence is to start with one of the      T   n      {\displaystyle T_{n}}   possible unrooted trees, choose one of its     n    {\displaystyle n}   vertices as root, and choose one of the     (  n  −  1  )  !
possible sequences in which to add its     n  −  1    {\displaystyle n-1}   (directed) edges.
Therefore, the total number of sequences that can be formed in this way is      T   n    n  (  n  −  1  )  !
=   T   n    n  !
{\displaystyle T_{n}n(n-1)!=T_{n}n!}
Another way to count these edge sequences is to consider adding the edges one by one to an empty graph, and to count the number of choices available at each step.
If one has added a collection of     n  −  k    {\displaystyle n-k}   edges already, so that the graph formed by these edges is a rooted forest with     k    {\displaystyle k}   trees, there are     n  (  k  −  1  )    {\displaystyle n(k-1)}   choices for the next edge to add: its starting vertex can be any one of the     n    {\displaystyle n}   vertices of the graph, and its ending vertex can be any one of the     k  −  1    {\displaystyle k-1}   roots other than the root of the tree containing the starting vertex.
Therefore, if one multiplies together the number of choices from the first step, the second step, etc., the total number of choices is      ∏   k  =  2    n    n  (  k  −  1  )  =   n   n  −  1    (  n  −  1  )  !
=   n   n  −  2    n  !
{\displaystyle \prod _{k=2}^{n}n(k-1)=n^{n-1}(n-1)!=n^{n-2}n!.}
Equating these two formulas for the number of edge sequences results in Cayley's formula:       T   n    n  !
{\displaystyle \displaystyle T_{n}n!=n^{n-2}n!}
and       T   n    =   n   n  −  2    .
{\displaystyle \displaystyle T_{n}=n^{n-2}.}
As Aigner and Ziegler describe, the formula and the proof can be generalized to count the number of rooted forests with     k    {\displaystyle k}   trees, for any     k    {\displaystyle k}   .
This then gives <math>\left (\sqrt{2}^{\sqrt{2}}\right )^{\sqrt{2}}=\sqrt{2}^{2}=2</math>, which is thus a rational number of the form <math>a^b.</math>  Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
Anything with which mathematical reasoning is possible  This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .
( June 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Schlegel wireframe 8-cell  A mathematical object is an abstract concept arising in mathematics .
In the usual language of mathematics, an object is anything that has been (or could be) formally defined, and with which one may do deductive reasoning and mathematical proofs .
Typically, a mathematical object can be a value that can be assigned to a variable , and therefore can be involved in formulas .
Commonly encountered mathematical objects include numbers , sets , functions , expressions , geometric objects , transformations of other mathematical objects, and spaces .
Mathematical objects can be very complex; for example, theorems , proofs , and even theories are considered as mathematical objects in proof theory .
The ontological status of mathematical objects has been the subject of much investigation and debate by philosophers of mathematics .
List of mathematical objects by branch   Number theory  numbers , operations  Combinatorics  permutations , derangements , combinations  Set theory  sets , set partitions  functions , and relations  Category theory  Categories  Functors  Morphisms  Objects  Natural transformations  Geometry  points , lines , line segments ,  polygons ( triangles , squares , pentagons , hexagons , ...), circles , ellipses , parabolas , hyperbolas ,  polyhedra ( tetrahedrons , cubes , octahedrons , dodecahedrons , icosahedrons ), spheres , ellipsoids , paraboloids , hyperboloids , cylinders , cones .
Graph theory  graphs , trees , nodes , edges  Topology  Closed sets  Filters  Neighbourhoods  Nets  Open sets  topological spaces  Uniformities  manifolds .
Atlases  Charts  Linear algebra  scalars , vectors , matrices , tensors .
Abstract algebra  groups ,  rings , modules ,  fields , vector spaces ,  group-theoretic lattices , and order-theoretic lattices .
Categories are simultaneously homes to mathematical objects and mathematical objects in their own right.
In proof theory , proofs and theorems are also mathematical objects.
Quotient of two integers  "Rationals" redirects here.
For other uses, see Rational (disambiguation) .
The rational numbers      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   are included in the real numbers       R     {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} }   , which are included in the complex numbers       C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }   , while rationals include the integers       Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   , which in turn include the natural numbers       N     {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} }   .
In mathematics , a rational number is a number that can be expressed as the quotient or fraction         p  q       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {p}{q}}}   of two integers , a numerator  p and a non-zero denominator  q .
For example,        3  7       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{7}}}   is a rational number, as is every integer (e.g.,     −  5  =      −  5   1       {\displaystyle -5={\tfrac {-5}{1}}}   ).
The set of all rational numbers, also referred to as " the rationals ",  the field of rationals  or the field of rational numbers is usually denoted by boldface Q , or blackboard bold       Q   .
{\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} .}
A rational number is a real number .
The real numbers that are rational are those whose decimal expansion either terminates after a finite number of digits (example: 3/4 = 0.75 ), or eventually begins to repeat the same finite sequence of digits over and over (example: 9/44 = 0.20454545...
).
This statement is true not only in base 10 , but also in every other integer base , such as the binary and hexadecimal ones (see Repeating decimal § Extension to other bases ).
A real number that is not rational is called irrational .
Irrational numbers include the square root of 2  (       2      {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}   ),  π , e , and the golden ratio ( φ ).
Since the set of rational numbers is countable , and the set of real numbers is uncountable , almost all real numbers are irrational.
Rational numbers can be formally defined as equivalence classes of pairs of integers ( p, q ) with q ≠ 0 , using the equivalence relation defined as follows:      (   p   1    ,   q   1    )  ∼  (   p   2    ,   q   2    )   ⟺    p   1     q   2    =   p   2     q   1    .
{\displaystyle (p_{1},q_{1})\sim (p_{2},q_{2})\iff p_{1}q_{2}=p_{2}q_{1}.}
The fraction        p  q       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {p}{q}}}   then denotes the equivalence class of ( p, q ) .
Rational numbers together with addition and multiplication form a field which contains the integers , and is contained in any field containing the integers.
In other words, the field of rational numbers is a prime field , and a field has characteristic zero if and only if it contains the rational numbers as a subfield.
Finite extensions of      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   are called algebraic number fields , and the algebraic closure of      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is the field of algebraic numbers .
In mathematical analysis , the rational numbers form a dense subset of the real numbers.
The real numbers can be constructed from the rational numbers by completion , using Cauchy sequences , Dedekind cuts , or infinite decimals (see Construction of the real numbers ).
Terminology   The term rational in reference to the set      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   refers to the fact that a rational number represents a ratio of two integers.
In mathematics, "rational" is often used as a noun abbreviating "rational number".
The adjective rational sometimes means that the coefficients are rational numbers.
For example, a rational point is a point with rational coordinates (i.e., a point whose coordinates are rational numbers); a rational matrix is a matrix of rational numbers; a rational polynomial may be a polynomial with rational coefficients, although the term "polynomial over the rationals" is generally preferred, to avoid confusion between " rational expression " and " rational function " (a polynomial is a rational expression and defines a rational function, even if its coefficients are not rational numbers).
However, a rational curve  is not a curve defined over the rationals, but a curve which can be parameterized by rational functions.
Etymology   Although nowadays rational numbers are defined in terms of ratios , the term rational is not a derivation of ratio .
On the contrary, it is ratio that is derived from rational : the first use of ratio with its modern meaning was attested in English about 1660,  while the use of rational for qualifying numbers appeared almost a century earlier, in 1570.
This meaning of rational came from the mathematical meaning of irrational , which was first used in 1551, and it was used in "translations of Euclid (following his peculiar use of ἄλογος )".
This unusual history originated in the fact that ancient Greeks "avoided heresy by forbidding themselves from thinking of those  lengths as numbers".
So such lengths were irrational , in the sense of illogical , that is "not to be spoken about" ( ἄλογος in Greek).
Arithmetic   See also: Fraction (mathematics) § Arithmetic with fractions  Irreducible fraction   Every rational number may be expressed in a unique way as an irreducible fraction         a  b     ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}},}   where a and b are coprime integers and b > 0 .
This is often called the canonical form of the rational number.
Starting from a rational number        a  b     ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}},}   its canonical form may be obtained by dividing a and b by their greatest common divisor , and, if b < 0 , changing the sign of the resulting numerator and denominator.
Embedding of integers   Any integer n can be expressed as the rational number        n  1     ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {n}{1}},}   which is its canonical form as a rational number.
Equality         a  b    =    c  d      {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}={\frac {c}{d}}}   if and only if     a  d  =  b  c    {\displaystyle ad=bc}    If both fractions are in canonical form, then:        a  b    =    c  d      {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}={\frac {c}{d}}}   if and only if     a  =  c    {\displaystyle a=c}   and     b  =  d    {\displaystyle b=d}     Ordering   If both denominators are positive (particularly if both fractions are in canonical form):        a  b    <    c  d      {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}<{\frac {c}{d}}}   if and only if     a  d  <  b  c  .
{\displaystyle ad<bc.}
On the other hand, if either denominator is negative, then each fraction with a negative denominator must first be converted into an equivalent form with a positive denominator—by changing the signs of both its numerator and denominator.
Addition   Two fractions are added as follows:        a  b    +    c  d    =     a  d  +  b  c    b  d     .
{\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}+{\frac {c}{d}}={\frac {ad+bc}{bd}}.}
If both fractions are in canonical form, the result is in canonical form if and only if b, d are coprime integers .
Subtraction         a  b    −    c  d    =     a  d  −  b  c    b  d     .
{\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}-{\frac {c}{d}}={\frac {ad-bc}{bd}}.}
Multiplication   The rule for multiplication is:        a  b    ⋅    c  d    =     a  c    b  d     .
{\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}\cdot {\frac {c}{d}}={\frac {ac}{bd}}.}
where the result may be a reducible fraction —even if both original fractions are in canonical form.
Inverse   Every rational number        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   has an additive inverse , often called its opposite ,      −   (    a  b    )   =     −  a   b    .
{\displaystyle -\left({\frac {a}{b}}\right)={\frac {-a}{b}}.}
If        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   is in canonical form, the same is true for its opposite.
A nonzero rational number        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   has a multiplicative inverse , also called its reciprocal ,        (    a  b    )    −  1    =    b  a    .
{\displaystyle \left({\frac {a}{b}}\right)^{-1}={\frac {b}{a}}.}
If        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   is in canonical form, then the canonical form of its reciprocal is either        b  a       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {b}{a}}}   or         −  b    −  a      ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {-b}{-a}},}   depending on the sign of a .
Division   If b, c, d are nonzero, the division rule is             a  b         c  d      =     a  d    b  c     .
{\displaystyle {\frac {\,{\dfrac {a}{b}}\,}{\dfrac {c}{d}}}={\frac {ad}{bc}}.}
Thus, dividing        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   by        c  d       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {c}{d}}}   is equivalent to multiplying        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   by the reciprocal of        c  d     :    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {c}{d}}:}             a  d    b  c     =    a  b    ⋅    d  c    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {ad}{bc}}={\frac {a}{b}}\cdot {\frac {d}{c}}.}
Exponentiation to integer power   If n is a non-negative integer, then        (    a  b    )    n    =     a   n     b   n      .
{\displaystyle \left({\frac {a}{b}}\right)^{n}={\frac {a^{n}}{b^{n}}}.}
The result is in canonical form if the same is true for        a  b     .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}.}
In particular,        (    a  b    )    0    =  1.
{\displaystyle \left({\frac {a}{b}}\right)^{0}=1.}
If a ≠ 0 , then        (    a  b    )    −  n    =     b   n     a   n      .
{\displaystyle \left({\frac {a}{b}}\right)^{-n}={\frac {b^{n}}{a^{n}}}.}
If        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   is in canonical form, the canonical form of the result is         b   n     a   n         {\displaystyle {\tfrac {b^{n}}{a^{n}}}}   if a > 0 or n is even.
Otherwise, the canonical form of the result is         −   b   n      −   a   n        .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {-b^{n}}{-a^{n}}}.}
Continued fraction representation   Main article: Continued fraction  A finite continued fraction is an expression such as       a   0    +          1            a   1    +          1            a   2    +          1           ⋱  +          1            a   n                        ,    {\displaystyle a_{0}+{\cfrac {1}{a_{1}+{\cfrac {1}{a_{2}+{\cfrac {1}{\ddots +{\cfrac {1}{a_{n}}}}}}}}},}    where a n are integers.
Every rational number        a  b       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {a}{b}}}   can be represented as a finite continued fraction, whose coefficients  a n can be determined by applying the Euclidean algorithm to ( a, b ) .
Other representations   common fraction :        8  3       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {8}{3}}}    mixed numeral :     2     2  3       {\displaystyle 2{\tfrac {2}{3}}}    repeating decimal using a vinculum :     2.
6  ¯      {\displaystyle 2.
{\overline {6}}}    repeating decimal using parentheses :     2.
(  6  )    {\displaystyle 2.
(6)}    continued fraction using traditional typography:     2  +     1   1  +     1  2           {\displaystyle 2+{\tfrac {1}{1+{\tfrac {1}{2}}}}}    continued fraction in abbreviated notation:         {\displaystyle }    Egyptian fraction :     2  +     1  2     +     1  6       {\displaystyle 2+{\tfrac {1}{2}}+{\tfrac {1}{6}}}    prime power decomposition :      2   3    ×   3   −  1      {\displaystyle 2^{3}\times 3^{-1}}    quote notation :      3  ′   6    {\displaystyle 3'6}    are different ways to represent the same rational value.
Formal construction   A diagram showing a representation of the equivalent classes of pairs of integers  The rational numbers may be built as equivalence classes of ordered pairs of integers .
More precisely, let     (   Z   ×  (   Z   ∖  {  0  }  )  )    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Z} \times (\mathbb {Z} \setminus \{0\}))}   be the set of the pairs ( m, n ) of integers such n ≠ 0 .
An equivalence relation is defined on this set by      (   m   1    ,   n   1    )  ∼  (   m   2    ,   n   2    )   ⟺    m   1     n   2    =   m   2     n   1    .
{\displaystyle (m_{1},n_{1})\sim (m_{2},n_{2})\iff m_{1}n_{2}=m_{2}n_{1}.}
Addition and multiplication can be defined by the following rules:      (   m   1    ,   n   1    )  +  (   m   2    ,   n   2    )  ≡  (   m   1     n   2    +   n   1     m   2    ,   n   1     n   2    )  ,    {\displaystyle (m_{1},n_{1})+(m_{2},n_{2})\equiv (m_{1}n_{2}+n_{1}m_{2},n_{1}n_{2}),}        (   m   1    ,   n   1    )  ×  (   m   2    ,   n   2    )  ≡  (   m   1     m   2    ,   n   1     n   2    )  .
{\displaystyle (m_{1},n_{1})\times (m_{2},n_{2})\equiv (m_{1}m_{2},n_{1}n_{2}).}
This equivalence relation is a congruence relation , which means that it is compatible with the addition and multiplication defined above; the set of rational numbers      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is the defined as the quotient set by this equivalence relation,     (   Z   ×  (   Z   ∖  {  0  }  )  )   /   ∼  ,    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Z} \times (\mathbb {Z} \backslash \{0\}))/\sim ,}   equipped with the addition and the multiplication induced by the above operations.
(This construction can be carried out with any integral domain and produces its field of fractions .)
The equivalence class of a pair ( m, n ) is denoted        m  n     .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {m}{n}}.}
Two pairs ( m 1 , n 1 ) and ( m 2 , n 2 ) belong to the same equivalence class (that is are equivalent) if and only if       m   1     n   2    =   m   2     n   1    .
{\displaystyle m_{1}n_{2}=m_{2}n_{1}.}
This means that         m   1     n   1      =     m   2     n   2        {\displaystyle {\frac {m_{1}}{n_{1}}}={\frac {m_{2}}{n_{2}}}}    if and only if          m   1     n   2    =   m   2     n   1    .
Every equivalence class        m  n       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {m}{n}}}   may be represented by infinitely many pairs, since      ⋯  =     −  2  m    −  2  n     =     −  m    −  n     =    m  n    =     2  m    2  n     =  ⋯  .
{\displaystyle \cdots ={\frac {-2m}{-2n}}={\frac {-m}{-n}}={\frac {m}{n}}={\frac {2m}{2n}}=\cdots .}
Each equivalence class contains a unique canonical representative element .
The canonical representative is the unique pair ( m, n ) in the equivalence class such that m and n are coprime , and n > 0 .
It is called the representation in lowest terms of the rational number.
The integers may be considered to be rational numbers identifying the integer n with the rational number        n  1     .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {n}{1}}.}
A total order may be defined on the rational numbers, that extends the natural order of the integers.
One has         m   1     n   1      ≤     m   2     n   2        {\displaystyle {\frac {m_{1}}{n_{1}}}\leq {\frac {m_{2}}{n_{2}}}}    If            (   n   1     n   2    >  0    and     m   1     n   2    ≤   n   1     m   2    )         or         (   n   1     n   2    <  0    and     m   1     n   2    ≥   n   1     m   2    )  .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}&(n_{1}n_{2}>0\quad {\text{and}}\quad m_{1}n_{2}\leq n_{1}m_{2})\\&\qquad {\text{or}}\\&(n_{1}n_{2}<0\quad {\text{and}}\quad m_{1}n_{2}\geq n_{1}m_{2}).\end{aligned}}}    Properties   The set      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   of all rational numbers, together with the addition and multiplication operations shown above, forms a field .
Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   has no field automorphism other than the identity.
(A field automorphism must fix 0 and 1; as it must fix the sum and the difference  of two fixed elements, it must fix every integer; as it must fix the quotient of two fixed elements, it must fix every rational number, and is thus the identity.)
Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is a prime field , which is a field that has no subfield other than itself.
The rationals are the smallest field with characteristic zero.
Every field of characteristic zero contains a unique subfield isomorphic to      Q   .
With the order defined above,      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is an ordered field  that has no subfield other than itself, and is the smallest ordered field, in the sense that every ordered field contains a unique subfield isomorphic to      Q   .
Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is the field of fractions of the integers       Z   .
{\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} .}
The algebraic closure of      Q   ,    {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} ,}   i.e.
the field of roots of rational polynomials, is the field of algebraic numbers .
The rationals are a densely ordered set: between any two rationals, there sits another one, and, therefore, infinitely many other ones.
For example, for any two fractions such that        a  b    <    c  d      {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}<{\frac {c}{d}}}    (where     b  ,  d    {\displaystyle b,d}   are positive), we have        a  b    <     a  +  c    b  +  d     <    c  d    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}}<{\frac {a+c}{b+d}}<{\frac {c}{d}}.}
Any totally ordered set which is countable, dense (in the above sense), and has no least or greatest element is order isomorphic to the rational numbers.
Countability   Illustration of the countability of the positive rationals  The set of all rational numbers is countable , as is illustrated in the figure to the right.
As a rational number can be expressed as a ratio of two integers, it is possible to assign two integers to any point on a square lattice as in a Cartesian coordinate system , such that any grid point corresponds to a rational number.
This method, however, exhibits a form of redundancy, as several different grid points will correspond to the same rational number; these are highlighted in red on the provided graphic.
An obvious example can be seen in the line going diagonally towards the bottom right; such ratios will always equal 1, as any non-zero number divided by itself will always equal one.
It is possible to generate all of the rational numbers without such redundancies: examples include the Calkin–Wilf tree and Stern–Brocot tree .
As the set of all rational numbers is countable, and the set of all real numbers (as well as the set of irrational numbers) is uncountable, the set of rational numbers is a null set , that is, almost all real numbers are irrational, in the sense of Lebesgue measure .
Real numbers and topological properties   The rationals are a dense subset of the real numbers ; every real number has rational numbers arbitrarily close to it.
A related property is that rational numbers are the only numbers with finite expansions as regular continued fractions .
In the usual topology of the real numbers, the rationals are neither an open set nor a closed set .
By virtue of their order, the rationals carry an order topology .
The rational numbers, as a subspace of the real numbers, also carry a subspace topology .
The rational numbers form a metric space by using the absolute difference metric     d  (  x  ,  y  )  =   |   x  −  y   |   ,    {\displaystyle d(x,y)=|x-y|,}   and this yields a third topology on      Q   .
All three topologies coincide and turn the rationals into a topological field .
The rational numbers are an important example of a space which is not locally compact .
The rationals are characterized topologically as the unique countable  metrizable space without isolated points .
The space is also totally disconnected .
The rational numbers do not form a complete metric space , and the real numbers are the completion of      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   under the metric     d  (  x  ,  y  )  =   |   x  −  y   |     {\displaystyle d(x,y)=|x-y|}   above.
p -adic numbers   Main article: p -adic number  In addition to the absolute value metric mentioned above, there are other metrics which turn      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   into a topological field: Let p be a prime number and for any non-zero integer a , let      |   a    |    p    =   p   −  n    ,    {\displaystyle |a|_{p}=p_{-n},}   where p n is the highest power of p  dividing  a .
In addition set      |   0    |    p    =  0.
{\displaystyle |0|_{p}=0.}
For any rational number       a  b    ,    {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{b}},}   we set        |    a  b    |    p    =      |   a    |    p       |   b    |    p       .
{\displaystyle \left|{\frac {a}{b}}\right|_{p}={\frac {|a|_{p}}{|b|_{p}}}.}
Then       d   p    (  x  ,  y  )  =   |   x  −  y    |    p      {\displaystyle d_{p}(x,y)=|x-y|_{p}}    defines a metric on      Q   .
The metric space     (   Q   ,   d   p    )    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Q} ,d_{p})}   is not complete, and its completion is the p -adic number field        Q    p    .
{\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} _{p}.}
Ostrowski's theorem states that any non-trivial absolute value on the rational numbers      Q     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} }   is equivalent to either the usual real absolute value or a p -adic absolute value.
===Statistical proofs in pure mathematics===
{{Main| Statistical proof}}
The expression "statistical proof" may be used technically or colloquially in areas of ], such as involving ], ], and ] or ].<ref>"in number theory and commutative algebra...
in particular the statistical proof of the lemma."
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Statistical proof is the rational demonstration of degree of certainty for a proposition , hypothesis or theory that is used to convince others subsequent to a statistical test of the supporting evidence and the types of inferences that can be drawn from the test scores.
Statistical methods are used to increase the understanding of the facts and the proof demonstrates the validity and logic of inference with explicit reference to a hypothesis, the experimental data , the facts, the test, and the odds .
Proof has two essential aims: the first is to convince and the second is to explain the proposition through peer and public review.
The burden of proof rests on the demonstrable application of the statistical method, the disclosure of the assumptions, and the relevance that the test has with respect to a genuine understanding of the data relative to the external world.
There are adherents to several different statistical philosophies of inference, such as Bayes theorem versus the likelihood function , or positivism versus critical rationalism .
These methods of reason have direct bearing on statistical proof and its interpretations in the broader philosophy of science.
A common demarcation between science and non-science is the hypothetico-deductive proof of falsification developed by Karl Popper , which is a well-established practice in the tradition of statistics.
Other modes of inference, however, may include the inductive and abductive modes of proof.
Scientists do not use statistical proof as a means to attain certainty, but to falsify claims and explain theory.
Science cannot achieve absolute certainty nor is it a continuous march toward an objective truth as the vernacular as opposed to the scientific meaning of the term "proof" might imply.
Statistical proof offers a kind of proof of a theory's falsity and the means to learn heuristically through repeated statistical trials and experimental error.
Statistical proof also has applications in legal matters with implications for the legal burden of proof .
Axioms   There are two kinds of axioms , 1) conventions that are taken as true that should be avoided because they cannot be tested, and 2) hypotheses.
Proof in the theory of probability was built on four axioms developed in the late 17th century:  The probability of a hypothesis is a non-negative real number:       {    Pr  (  h  )  ≧  0    }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr(h)\geqq 0{\bigg \}}}   ;  The probability of necessary truth equals one:       {    Pr  (  t  )  =  1    }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr(t)=1{\bigg \}}}   ;  If two hypotheses h 1 and h 2 are mutually exclusive, then the sum of their probabilities is equal to the probability of their disjunction :       {    Pr   (   h   1    )   +  Pr   (   h   2    )   =  Pr   (    h   1    o  r   h   2     )     }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr \left(h_{1}\right)+\Pr \left(h_{2}\right)=\Pr \left(h_{1}orh_{2}\right){\bigg \}}}   ;  The conditional probability of h 1 given h 2        {    Pr  (   h   1     |    h   2    )    }      {\displaystyle {\Bigg \{}\Pr(h_{1}|h_{2}){\Bigg \}}}   is equal to the unconditional probability       {    Pr  (   h   1    &   h   2    )    }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr(h_{1}\And h_{2}){\bigg \}}}   of the conjunction h 1 and h 2 , divided by the unconditional probability       {    Pr  (   h   2    )    }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr(h_{2}){\bigg \}}}   of h 2 where that probability is positive       {    Pr  (   h   1     |    h   2    )  =     Pr  (   h   1    &   h   2    )    Pr  (   h   2    )       }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr(h_{1}|h_{2})={\frac {\Pr(h_{1}\And h_{2})}{\Pr(h_{2})}}{\bigg \}}}   , where       {    Pr  (   h   2    )  >  0    }      {\displaystyle {\bigg \{}\Pr(h_{2})>0{\bigg \}}}   .
The preceding axioms provide the statistical proof and basis for the laws of randomness, or objective chance from where modern statistical theory has advanced.
Experimental data, however, can never prove that the hypotheses (h) is true, but relies on an inductive inference by measuring the probability of the hypotheses relative to the empirical data.
The proof is in the rational demonstration of using the logic of inference , math , testing , and deductive  reasoning of significance .
Test and proof   Main article: Statistical tests  The term proof descended from its Latin roots (provable, probable, probare L.) meaning to test .
Hence, proof is a form of inference by means of a statistical test.
Statistical tests are formulated on models that generate probability distributions .
Examples of probability distributions might include the binary , normal , or poisson distribution that give exact descriptions of variables that behave according to natural laws of random chance .
When a statistical test is applied to samples of a population, the test determines if the sample statistics are significantly different from the assumed null-model .
True values of a population, which are unknowable in practice, are called parameters of the population.
Researchers sample from populations, which provide estimates of the parameters, to calculate the mean or standard deviation.
If the entire population is sampled, then the sample statistic mean and distribution will converge with the parametric distribution.
Using the scientific method of falsification, the probability value that the sample statistic is sufficiently different from the null-model than can be explained by chance alone is given prior to the test.
Most statisticians set the prior probability value at 0.05 or 0.1, which means if the sample statistics diverge from the parametric model more than 5 (or 10) times out of 100, then the discrepancy is unlikely to be explained by chance alone and the null-hypothesis is rejected.
Statistical models provide exact outcomes of the parametric and estimates of the sample statistics.
Hence, the burden of proof rests in the sample statistics that provide estimates of a statistical model.
Statistical models contain the mathematical proof of the parametric values and their probability distributions.
Bayes theorem   Main article: Bayes theorem  See also: Evidence under Bayes theorem  Bayesian statistics are based on a different philosophical approach for proof of inference .
The mathematical formula for Bayes's theorem is:     P  r    =     P  r    ×  P  r      P  r         {\displaystyle Pr={\frac {Pr\times Pr}{Pr}}}    The formula is read as the probability of the parameter (or hypothesis =h , as used in the notation on axioms ) “given” the data (or empirical observation), where the horizontal bar refers to "given".
The right hand side of the formula calculates the prior probability of a statistical model (Pr ) with the likelihood (Pr ) to produce a posterior probability distribution of the parameter (Pr ).
The posterior probability is the likelihood that the parameter is correct given the observed data or samples statistics.
Hypotheses can be compared using Bayesian inference by means of the Bayes factor, which is the ratio of the posterior odds to the prior odds.
It provides a measure of the data and if it has increased or decreased the likelihood of one hypothesis relative to another.
The statistical proof is the Bayesian demonstration that one hypothesis has a higher (weak, strong, positive) likelihood.
There is considerable debate if the Bayesian method aligns with Karl Poppers method of proof of falsification, where some have suggested that "...there is no such thing as "accepting" hypotheses at all.
All that one does in science is assign degrees of belief..."  : 180 According to Popper, hypotheses that have withstood testing and have yet to be falsified are not verified but corroborated .
Some researches have suggested that Popper's quest to define corroboration on the premise of probability put his philosophy in line with the Bayesian approach.
In this context, the likelihood of one hypothesis relative to another may be an index of corroboration, not confirmation, and thus statistically proven through rigorous objective standing.
In legal proceedings   Main article: Legal burden of proof    "Where gross statistical disparities can be shown, they alone may in a proper case constitute prima facie proof of a pattern or practice of discrimination."
: 271      Statistical proof in a legal proceeding can be sorted into three categories of evidence:  The occurrence of an event, act, or type of conduct,  The identity of the individual(s) responsible  The intent or psychological responsibility   Statistical proof was not regularly applied in decisions concerning United States legal proceedings until the mid 1970s following a landmark jury discrimination case in Castaneda v.
Partida .
The US Supreme Court ruled that gross statistical disparities constitutes " prima facie proof" of discrimination, resulting in a shift of the burden of proof from plaintiff to defendant.
Since that ruling, statistical proof has been used in many other cases on inequality, discrimination, and DNA evidence.
However, there is not a one-to-one correspondence between statistical proof and the legal burden of proof.
"The Supreme Court has stated that the degrees of rigor required in the fact finding processes of law and science do not necessarily correspond."
: 1533  In an example of a death row sentence ( McCleskey v.
 Kemp  ) concerning racial discrimination, the petitioner, a black man named McCleskey was charged with the murder of a white police officer during a robbery.
Expert testimony for McClesky introduced a statistical proof showing that "defendants charged with killing white victims were 4.3 times as likely to receive a death sentence as charged with killing blacks.".
: 595 Nonetheless, the statistics was insufficient "to prove that the decisionmakers in his case acted with discriminatory purpose."
: 596 It was further argued that there were "inherent limitations of the statistical proof",  : 596 because it did not refer to the specifics of the individual.
Despite the statistical demonstration of an increased probability of discrimination, the legal burden of proof (it was argued) had to be examined on a case-by-case basis.
Mathematics independent of applications  This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.
Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .
( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Pure mathematics studies the properties and structure of abstract objects,  such as the E8 group , in group theory .
This may be done without focusing on concrete applications of the concepts in the physical world.
Pure mathematics is the study of mathematical concepts independently of any application outside mathematics .
These concepts may originate in real-world concerns, and the results obtained may later turn out to be useful for practical applications, but pure mathematicians are not primarily motivated by such applications.
Instead, the appeal is attributed to the intellectual challenge and aesthetic beauty of working out the logical consequences of basic principles.
While pure mathematics has existed as an activity since at least ancient Greece , the concept was elaborated upon around the year 1900,  after the introduction of theories with counter-intuitive properties (such as non-Euclidean geometries and Cantor's theory of infinite sets), and the discovery of apparent paradoxes (such as continuous functions that are nowhere differentiable , and Russell's paradox ).
This introduced the need to renew the concept of mathematical rigor and rewrite all mathematics accordingly, with a systematic use of axiomatic methods .
This led many mathematicians to focus on mathematics for its own sake, that is, pure mathematics.
Nevertheless, almost all mathematical theories remained motivated by problems coming from the real world or from less abstract mathematical theories.
Also, many mathematical theories, which had seemed to be totally pure mathematics, were eventually used in applied areas, mainly physics and computer science .
A famous early example is Isaac Newton 's demonstration that his law of universal gravitation implied that planets move in orbits that are conic sections , geometrical curves that had been studied in antiquity by Apollonius .
Another example is the problem of factoring large integers , which is the basis of the RSA cryptosystem , widely used to secure internet communications.
It follows that, presently, the distinction between pure and applied mathematics is more a philosophical point of view or a mathematician's preference rather than a rigid subdivision of mathematics.
History   Ancient Greece   Ancient Greek mathematicians were among the earliest to make a distinction between pure and applied mathematics.
Plato helped to create the gap between "arithmetic", now called number theory , and "logistic", now called arithmetic .
Plato regarded logistic (arithmetic) as appropriate for businessmen and men of war who "must learn the art of numbers or  will not know how to array  troops" and arithmetic (number theory) as appropriate for philosophers "because  to arise out of the sea of change and lay hold of true being."
Euclid of Alexandria , when asked by one of his students of what use was the study of geometry, asked his slave to give the student threepence, "since he must make gain of what he learns."
The Greek mathematician Apollonius of Perga was asked about the usefulness of some of his theorems in Book IV of Conics to which he proudly asserted,    They are worthy of acceptance for the sake of the demonstrations themselves, in the same way as we accept many other things in mathematics for this and for no other reason.
And since many of his results were not applicable to the science or engineering of his day, Apollonius further argued in the preface of the fifth book of Conics that the subject is one of those that "...seem worthy of study for their own sake."
19th century   The term itself is enshrined in the full title of the Sadleirian Chair , "Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathematics", founded (as a professorship) in the mid-nineteenth century.
The idea of a separate discipline of pure mathematics may have emerged at that time.
The generation of Gauss made no sweeping distinction of the kind between pure and applied .
In the following years, specialisation and professionalisation (particularly in the Weierstrass approach to mathematical analysis ) started to make a rift more apparent.
20th century   At the start of the twentieth century mathematicians took up the axiomatic method , strongly influenced by David Hilbert 's example.
The logical formulation of pure mathematics suggested by Bertrand Russell in terms of a quantifier structure of propositions seemed more and more plausible, as large parts of mathematics became axiomatised and thus subject to the simple criteria of rigorous proof .
Pure mathematics, according to a view that can be ascribed to the Bourbaki group , is what is proved.
"Pure mathematician" became a recognized vocation, achievable through training.
The case was made that pure mathematics is useful in engineering education :    There is a training in habits of thought, points of view, and intellectual comprehension of ordinary engineering problems, which only the study of higher mathematics can give.
Generality and abstraction   An illustration of the Banach–Tarski paradox , a famous result in pure mathematics.
Although it is proven that it is possible to convert one sphere into two using nothing but cuts and rotations, the transformation involves objects that cannot exist in the physical world.
One central concept in pure mathematics is the idea of generality; pure mathematics often exhibits a trend towards increased generality.
Uses and advantages of generality include the following:  Generalizing theorems or mathematical structures can lead to deeper understanding of the original theorems or structures  Generality can simplify the presentation of material, resulting in shorter proofs or arguments that are easier to follow.
One can use generality to avoid duplication of effort, proving a general result instead of having to prove separate cases independently, or using results from other areas of mathematics.
Generality can facilitate connections between different branches of mathematics.
Category theory is one area of mathematics dedicated to exploring this commonality of structure as it plays out in some areas of math.
Generality's impact on intuition is both dependent on the subject and a matter of personal preference or learning style.
Often generality is seen as a hindrance to intuition, although it can certainly function as an aid to it, especially when it provides analogies to material for which one already has good intuition.
As a prime example of generality, the Erlangen program involved an expansion of geometry to accommodate non-Euclidean geometries as well as the field of topology , and other forms of geometry, by viewing geometry as the study of a space together with a group of transformations.
The study of numbers , called algebra at the beginning undergraduate level, extends to abstract algebra at a more advanced level; and the study of functions , called calculus at the college freshman level becomes mathematical analysis and functional analysis at a more advanced level.
Each of these branches of more abstract mathematics have many sub-specialties, and there are in fact many connections between pure mathematics and applied mathematics disciplines.
A steep rise in abstraction was seen mid 20th century.
In practice, however, these developments led to a sharp divergence from physics , particularly from 1950 to 1983.
Later this was criticised, for example by Vladimir Arnold , as too much Hilbert , not enough Poincaré .
The point does not yet seem to be settled, in that string theory pulls one way, while discrete mathematics pulls back towards proof as central.
Pure vs.
applied mathematics   Mathematicians have always had differing opinions regarding the distinction between pure and applied mathematics.
One of the most famous (but perhaps misunderstood) modern examples of this debate can be found in G.H.
Hardy 's 1940 essay A Mathematician's Apology .
It is widely believed that Hardy considered applied mathematics to be ugly and dull.
Although it is true that Hardy preferred pure mathematics, which he often compared to painting and poetry , Hardy saw the distinction between pure and applied mathematics to be simply that applied mathematics sought to express physical truth in a mathematical framework, whereas pure mathematics expressed truths that were independent of the physical world.
Hardy made a separate distinction in mathematics between what he called "real" mathematics, "which has permanent aesthetic value", and "the dull and elementary parts of mathematics" that have practical use.
Hardy considered some physicists, such as Einstein and Dirac , to be among the "real" mathematicians, but at the time that he was writing his Apology , he considered general relativity and quantum mechanics to be "useless", which allowed him to hold the opinion that only "dull" mathematics was useful.
Moreover, Hardy briefly admitted that—just as the application of matrix theory and group theory to physics had come unexpectedly—the time may come where some kinds of beautiful, "real" mathematics may be useful as well.
Another insightful view is offered by American mathematician Andy Magid :  I've always thought that a good model here could be drawn from ring theory.
In that subject, one has the subareas of commutative ring theory and non-commutative ring theory .
An uninformed observer might think that these represent a dichotomy, but in fact the latter subsumes the former: a non-commutative ring is a not-necessarily-commutative ring.
If we use similar conventions, then we could refer to applied mathematics and nonapplied mathematics, where by the latter we mean not-necessarily-applied mathematics ...
   Friedrich Engels argued in his 1878 book Anti-Dühring that "it is not at all true that in pure mathematics the mind deals only with its own creations and imaginations.
The concepts of number and figure have not been invented from any source other than the world of reality".
: 36 He further argued that "Before one came upon the idea of deducing the form of a cylinder from the rotation of a rectangle about one of its sides, a number of real rectangles and cylinders, however imperfect in form, must have been examined.
Like all other sciences, mathematics arose out of the needs of men...But, as in every department of thought, at a certain stage of development the laws, which were abstracted from the real world, become divorced from the real world, and are set up against it as something independent, as laws coming from outside, to which the world has to conform."
: 37  Practice and study of secure communication techniques  "Secret code" redirects here.
For the Aya Kamiki album, see Secret Code .
"Cryptology" redirects here.
For the David S.
Ware album, see Cryptology (album) .
Find sources:  "Cryptography" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )    Lorenz cipher machine, used in World War II to encrypt communications of the German High Command  Cryptography , or cryptology (from Ancient Greek : κρυπτός , romanized : kryptós "hidden, secret"; and γράφειν  graphein , "to write", or -λογία  -logia , "study", respectively  ), is the practice and study of techniques for secure communication in the presence of adversarial behavior.
More generally, cryptography is about constructing and analyzing protocols that prevent third parties or the public from reading private messages.
Modern cryptography exists at the intersection of the disciplines of mathematics , computer science , information security , electrical engineering , digital signal processing , physics , and others.
Core concepts related to information security ( data confidentiality , data integrity , authentication , and non-repudiation ) are also central to cryptography.
Practical applications of cryptography include electronic commerce , chip-based payment cards , digital currencies , computer passwords , and military communications .
Cryptography prior to the modern age was effectively synonymous with encryption , converting readable information ( plaintext ) to unintelligible nonsense text ( ciphertext ), which can only be read by reversing the process ( decryption ).
The sender of an encrypted (coded) message shares the decryption (decoding) technique only with the intended recipients to preclude access from adversaries.
The cryptography literature often uses the names "Alice" (or "A") for the sender, "Bob" (or "B") for the intended recipient, and "Eve" (or "E") for the eavesdropping adversary.
Since the development of rotor cipher machines in World War I and the advent of computers in World War II , cryptography methods have become increasingly complex and their applications more varied.
Modern cryptography is heavily based on mathematical theory and computer science practice; cryptographic algorithms are designed around computational hardness assumptions , making such algorithms hard to break in actual practice by any adversary.
While it is theoretically possible to break into a well-designed system, it is infeasible in actual practice to do so.
Such schemes, if well designed, are therefore termed "computationally secure".
Theoretical advances (e.g., improvements in integer factorization algorithms) and faster computing technology require these designs to be continually reevaluated and, if necessary, adapted.
Information-theoretically secure schemes that provably cannot be broken even with unlimited computing power, such as the one-time pad , are much more difficult to use in practice than the best theoretically breakable but computationally secure schemes.
The growth of cryptographic technology has raised a number of legal issues in the Information Age .
Cryptography's potential for use as a tool for espionage and sedition has led many governments to classify it as a weapon and to limit or even prohibit its use and export.
In some jurisdictions where the use of cryptography is legal, laws permit investigators to compel the disclosure of encryption keys for documents relevant to an investigation.
Cryptography also plays a major role in digital rights management and copyright infringement disputes with regard to digital media .
Terminology   Alphabet shift ciphers are believed to have been used by Julius Caesar over 2,000 years ago.
This is an example with k = 3 .
In other words, the letters in the alphabet are shifted three in one direction to encrypt and three in the other direction to decrypt.
The first use of the term "cryptograph" (as opposed to " cryptogram ") dates back to the 19th century —originating from " The Gold-Bug ", a story by Edgar Allan Poe .
Until modern times, cryptography referred almost exclusively to "encryption", which is the process of converting ordinary information (called plaintext ) into an unintelligible form (called ciphertext ).
Decryption is the reverse, in other words, moving from the unintelligible ciphertext back to plaintext.
A cipher (or cypher) is a pair of algorithms that carry out the encryption and the reversing decryption.
The detailed operation of a cipher is controlled both by the algorithm and, in each instance, by a "key".
The key is a secret (ideally known only to the communicants), usually a string of characters (ideally short so it can be remembered by the user), which is needed to decrypt the ciphertext.
In formal mathematical terms, a " cryptosystem " is the ordered list of elements of finite possible plaintexts, finite possible cyphertexts, finite possible keys, and the encryption and decryption algorithms that correspond to each key.
Keys are important both formally and in actual practice, as ciphers without variable keys can be trivially broken with only the knowledge of the cipher used and are therefore useless (or even counter-productive) for most purposes.
Historically, ciphers were often used directly for encryption or decryption without additional procedures such as authentication or integrity checks.
There are two main types of cryptosystems: symmetric and asymmetric .
In symmetric systems, the only ones known until the 1970s, the same secret key encrypts and decrypts a message.
Data manipulation in symmetric systems is significantly faster than in asymmetric systems.
Asymmetric systems use a "public key" to encrypt a message and a related "private key" to decrypt it.
The advantage of asymmetric systems is that the public key can be freely published, allowing parties to establish secure communication without having a shared secret key.
In practice, asymmetric systems are used to first exchange a secret key, and then secure communication proceeds via a more efficient symmetric system using that key.
Examples of asymmetric systems include Diffie–Hellman key exchange , RSA ( Rivest–Shamir–Adleman ), ECC ( Elliptic Curve Cryptography ), and Post-quantum cryptography .
Secure symmetric algorithms include the commonly used AES ( Advanced Encryption Standard ) which replaced the older DES ( Data Encryption Standard ).
Insecure symmetric algorithms include children's language tangling schemes such as Pig Latin or other cant , and all historical cryptographic schemes, however seriously intended, prior to the invention of the one-time pad early in the 20th century.
In colloquial use, the term " code " is often used to mean any method of encryption or concealment of meaning.
However, in cryptography, code has a more specific meaning: the replacement of a unit of plaintext (i.e., a meaningful word or phrase) with a code word (for example, "wallaby" replaces "attack at dawn").
A cypher, in contrast, is a scheme for changing or substituting an element below such a level (a letter, a syllable, or a pair of letters, etc.)
in order to produce a cyphertext.
Cryptanalysis is the term used for the study of methods for obtaining the meaning of encrypted information without access to the key normally required to do so; i.e., it is the study of how to "crack" encryption algorithms or their implementations.
Some use the terms "cryptography" and "cryptology" interchangeably in English,  while others (including US military practice generally) use "cryptography" to refer specifically to the use and practice of cryptographic techniques and "cryptology" to refer to the combined study of cryptography and cryptanalysis.
English is more flexible than several other languages in which "cryptology" (done by cryptologists) is always used in the second sense above.
RFC  2828 advises that steganography is sometimes included in cryptology.
The study of characteristics of languages that have some application in cryptography or cryptology (e.g.
frequency data, letter combinations, universal patterns, etc.)
is called cryptolinguistics .
Cryptolingusitics is especially used in military intelligence applications for deciphering foreign communications.
History   Main article: History of cryptography  Before the modern era, cryptography focused on message confidentiality (i.e., encryption)—conversion of messages from a comprehensible form into an incomprehensible one and back again at the other end, rendering it unreadable by interceptors or eavesdroppers without secret knowledge (namely the key needed for decryption of that message).
Encryption attempted to ensure secrecy in communications , such as those of spies , military leaders, and diplomats .
In recent decades, the field has expanded beyond confidentiality concerns to include techniques for message integrity checking, sender/receiver identity authentication, digital signatures , interactive proofs and secure computation , among others.
Classic cryptography   Reconstructed ancient Greek  scytale , an early cipher device  The main classical cipher types are transposition ciphers , which rearrange the order of letters in a message (e.g., 'hello world' becomes 'ehlol owrdl' in a trivially simple rearrangement scheme), and substitution ciphers , which systematically replace letters or groups of letters with other letters or groups of letters (e.g., 'fly at once' becomes 'gmz bu podf' by replacing each letter with the one following it in the Latin alphabet ).
Simple versions of either have never offered much confidentiality from enterprising opponents.
An early substitution cipher was the Caesar cipher , in which each letter in the plaintext was replaced by a letter some fixed number of positions further down the alphabet.
Suetonius reports that Julius Caesar used it with a shift of three to communicate with his generals.
Atbash is an example of an early Hebrew cipher.
The earliest known use of cryptography is some carved ciphertext on stone in Egypt ( c.
1900 BCE ), but this may have been done for the amusement of literate observers rather than as a way of concealing information.
The Greeks of Classical times are said to have known of ciphers (e.g., the scytale transposition cipher claimed to have been used by the Spartan military).
Steganography (i.e., hiding even the existence of a message so as to keep it confidential) was also first developed in ancient times.
An early example, from Herodotus , was a message tattooed on a slave's shaved head and concealed under the regrown hair.
Other steganography methods involve 'hiding in plain sight,' such as using a music cipher to disguise an encrypted message within a regular piece of sheet music.
More modern examples of steganography include the use of invisible ink , microdots , and digital watermarks to conceal information.
In India, the 2000-year-old Kamasutra of Vātsyāyana speaks of two different kinds of ciphers called Kautiliyam and Mulavediya.
In the Kautiliyam, the cipher letter substitutions are based on phonetic relations, such as vowels becoming consonants.
In the Mulavediya, the cipher alphabet consists of pairing letters and using the reciprocal ones.
In Sassanid Persia , there were two secret scripts, according to the Muslim author Ibn al-Nadim : the šāh-dabīrīya (literally "King's script") which was used for official correspondence, and the rāz-saharīya which was used to communicate secret messages with other countries.
David Kahn notes in The Codebreakers that modern cryptology originated among the Arabs , the first people to systematically document cryptanalytic methods.
Al-Khalil (717–786) wrote the Book of Cryptographic Messages , which contains the first use of permutations and combinations to list all possible Arabic words with and without vowels.
First page of a book by Al-Kindi which discusses encryption of messages  Ciphertexts produced by a classical cipher (and some modern ciphers) will reveal statistical information about the plaintext, and that information can often be used to break the cipher.
After the discovery of frequency analysis , perhaps by the Arab mathematician and polymath  Al-Kindi (also known as Alkindus ) in the 9th century,  nearly all such ciphers could be broken by an informed attacker.
Such classical ciphers still enjoy popularity today, though mostly as puzzles (see cryptogram ).
Al-Kindi wrote a book on cryptography entitled Risalah fi Istikhraj al-Mu'amma ( Manuscript for the Deciphering Cryptographic Messages ), which described the first known use of frequency analysis cryptanalysis techniques.
16th-century book-shaped French cipher machine, with arms of Henri II of France  Enciphered letter from Gabriel de Luetz d'Aramon , French Ambassador to the Ottoman Empire , after 1546, with partial decipherment  Language letter frequencies may offer little help for some extended historical encryption techniques such as homophonic cipher that tend to flatten the frequency distribution.
For those ciphers, language letter group (or n-gram) frequencies may provide an attack.
Essentially all ciphers remained vulnerable to cryptanalysis using the frequency analysis technique until the development of the polyalphabetic cipher , most clearly by Leon Battista Alberti around the year 1467, though there is some indication that it was already known to Al-Kindi.
Alberti's innovation was to use different ciphers (i.e., substitution alphabets) for various parts of a message (perhaps for each successive plaintext letter at the limit).
He also invented what was probably the first automatic cipher device , a wheel that implemented a partial realization of his invention.
In the Vigenère cipher , a polyalphabetic cipher , encryption uses a key word , which controls letter substitution depending on which letter of the key word is used.
In the mid-19th century Charles Babbage showed that the Vigenère cipher was vulnerable to Kasiski examination , but this was first published about ten years later by Friedrich Kasiski .
Although frequency analysis can be a powerful and general technique against many ciphers, encryption has still often been effective in practice, as many a would-be cryptanalyst was unaware of the technique.
Breaking a message without using frequency analysis essentially required knowledge of the cipher used and perhaps of the key involved, thus making espionage, bribery, burglary, defection, etc., more attractive approaches to the cryptanalytically uninformed.
It was finally explicitly recognized in the 19th century that secrecy of a cipher's algorithm is not a sensible nor practical safeguard of message security; in fact, it was further realized that any adequate cryptographic scheme (including ciphers) should remain secure even if the adversary fully understands the cipher algorithm itself.
Security of the key used should alone be sufficient for a good cipher to maintain confidentiality under an attack.
This fundamental principle was first explicitly stated in 1883 by Auguste Kerckhoffs and is generally called Kerckhoffs's Principle ; alternatively and more bluntly, it was restated by Claude Shannon , the inventor of information theory and the fundamentals of theoretical cryptography, as Shannon's Maxim —'the enemy knows the system'.
Different physical devices and aids have been used to assist with ciphers.
One of the earliest may have been the scytale of ancient Greece, a rod supposedly used by the Spartans as an aid for a transposition cipher.
In medieval times, other aids were invented such as the cipher grille , which was also used for a kind of steganography.
With the invention of polyalphabetic ciphers came more sophisticated aids such as Alberti's own cipher disk , Johannes Trithemius ' tabula recta scheme, and Thomas Jefferson 's wheel cypher (not publicly known, and reinvented independently by Bazeries around 1900).
Many mechanical encryption/decryption devices were invented early in the 20th century, and several patented, among them rotor machines —famously including the Enigma machine used by the German government and military from the late 1920s and during World War II .
The ciphers implemented by better quality examples of these machine designs brought about a substantial increase in cryptanalytic difficulty after WWI.
Early computer-era cryptography   Cryptanalysis of the new mechanical ciphering devices proved to be both difficult and laborious.
In the United Kingdom, cryptanalytic efforts at Bletchley Park during WWII spurred the development of more efficient means for carrying out repetitive tasks, such as military code breaking (decryption) .
This culminated in the development of the Colossus , the world's first fully electronic, digital, programmable computer, which assisted in the decryption of ciphers generated by the German Army's Lorenz SZ40/42 machine.
Extensive open academic research into cryptography is relatively recent, beginning in the mid-1970s.
In the early 1970s IBM personnel designed the Data Encryption Standard (DES) algorithm that became the first federal government cryptography standard in the United States.
In 1976 Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman published the Diffie–Hellman key exchange algorithm.
In 1977 the RSA algorithm was published in Martin Gardner 's Scientific American column.
Since then, cryptography has become a widely used tool in communications, computer networks , and computer security generally.
Some modern cryptographic techniques can only keep their keys secret if certain mathematical problems are intractable , such as the integer factorization or the discrete logarithm problems, so there are deep connections with abstract mathematics .
There are very few cryptosystems that are proven to be unconditionally secure.
The one-time pad is one, and was proven to be so by Claude Shannon.
There are a few important algorithms that have been proven secure under certain assumptions.
For example, the infeasibility of factoring extremely large integers is the basis for believing that RSA is secure, and some other systems, but even so, proof of unbreakability is unavailable since the underlying mathematical problem remains open.
In practice, these are widely used, and are believed unbreakable in practice by most competent observers.
There are systems similar to RSA, such as one by Michael O.
Rabin that are provably secure provided factoring n = pq is impossible;  it is quite unusable in practice.
The discrete logarithm problem is the basis for believing some other cryptosystems are secure, and again, there are related, less practical systems that are provably secure relative to the solvability or insolvability discrete log problem.
As well as being aware of cryptographic history, cryptographic algorithm and system designers must also sensibly consider probable future developments while working on their designs.
For instance, continuous improvements in computer processing power have increased the scope of brute-force attacks , so when specifying key lengths , the required key lengths are similarly advancing.
The potential impact of quantum computing are already being considered by some cryptographic system designers developing post-quantum cryptography.
The announced imminence of small implementations of these machines may be making the need for preemptive caution rather more than merely speculative.
Modern cryptography   Prior to the early 20th century, cryptography was mainly concerned with linguistic and lexicographic patterns.
Since then cryptography has broadened in scope, and now makes extensive use of mathematical subdisciplines, including information theory , computational complexity , statistics , combinatorics , abstract algebra , number theory , and finite mathematics .
Cryptography is also a branch of engineering , but an unusual one since it deals with active, intelligent, and malevolent opposition; other kinds of engineering (e.g., civil or chemical engineering) need deal only with neutral natural forces.
There is also active research examining the relationship between cryptographic problems and quantum physics .
Just as the development of digital computers and electronics helped in cryptanalysis, it made possible much more complex ciphers.
Furthermore, computers allowed for the encryption of any kind of data representable in any binary format, unlike classical ciphers which only encrypted written language texts; this was new and significant.
Computer use has thus supplanted linguistic cryptography, both for cipher design and cryptanalysis.
Many computer ciphers can be characterized by their operation on binary  bit sequences (sometimes in groups or blocks), unlike classical and mechanical schemes, which generally manipulate traditional characters (i.e., letters and digits) directly.
However, computers have also assisted cryptanalysis, which has compensated to some extent for increased cipher complexity.
Nonetheless, good modern ciphers have stayed ahead of cryptanalysis; it is typically the case that use of a quality cipher is very efficient (i.e., fast and requiring few resources, such as memory or CPU capability), while breaking it requires an effort many orders of magnitude larger, and vastly larger than that required for any classical cipher, making cryptanalysis so inefficient and impractical as to be effectively impossible.
Modern cryptography   Symmetric-key cryptography   Main article: Symmetric-key algorithm  Symmetric-key cryptography, where a single key is used for encryption and decryption  Symmetric-key cryptography refers to encryption methods in which both the sender and receiver share the same key (or, less commonly, in which their keys are different, but related in an easily computable way).
This was the only kind of encryption publicly known until June 1976.
One round (out of 8.5) of the IDEA cipher, used in most versions of PGP and OpenPGP compatible software for time-efficient encryption of messages  Symmetric key ciphers are implemented as either block ciphers or stream ciphers .
A block cipher enciphers input in blocks of plaintext as opposed to individual characters, the input form used by a stream cipher.
The Data Encryption Standard (DES) and the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) are block cipher designs that have been designated cryptography standards by the US government (though DES's designation was finally withdrawn after the AES was adopted).
Despite its deprecation as an official standard, DES (especially its still-approved and much more secure triple-DES variant) remains quite popular; it is used across a wide range of applications, from ATM encryption  to e-mail privacy  and secure remote access .
Many other block ciphers have been designed and released, with considerable variation in quality.
Many, even some designed by capable practitioners, have been thoroughly broken, such as FEAL .
Stream ciphers, in contrast to the 'block' type, create an arbitrarily long stream of key material, which is combined with the plaintext bit-by-bit or character-by-character, somewhat like the one-time pad .
In a stream cipher, the output stream is created based on a hidden internal state that changes as the cipher operates.
That internal state is initially set up using the secret key material.
RC4 is a widely used stream cipher.
Block ciphers can be used as stream ciphers by generating blocks of a keystream (in place of a Pseudorandom number generator ) and applying an XOR operation to each bit of the plaintext with each bit of the keystream.
Message authentication codes (MACs) are much like cryptographic hash functions , except that a secret key can be used to authenticate the hash value upon receipt;   this additional complication blocks an attack scheme against bare digest algorithms , and so has been thought worth the effort.
Cryptographic hash functions are a third type of cryptographic algorithm.
They take a message of any length as input, and output a short, fixed-length hash , which can be used in (for example) a digital signature.
For good hash functions, an attacker cannot find two messages that produce the same hash.
MD4 is a long-used hash function that is now broken; MD5 , a strengthened variant of MD4, is also widely used but broken in practice.
The US National Security Agency developed the Secure Hash Algorithm series of MD5-like hash functions: SHA-0 was a flawed algorithm that the agency withdrew; SHA-1 is widely deployed and more secure than MD5, but cryptanalysts have identified attacks against it; the SHA-2 family improves on SHA-1, but is vulnerable to clashes as of 2011; and the US standards authority thought it "prudent" from a security perspective to develop a new standard to "significantly improve the robustness of NIST 's overall hash algorithm toolkit."
Thus, a hash function design competition was meant to select a new U.S. national standard, to be called SHA-3 , by 2012.
The competition ended on October 2, 2012, when the NIST announced that Keccak would be the new SHA-3 hash algorithm.
Unlike block and stream ciphers that are invertible, cryptographic hash functions produce a hashed output that cannot be used to retrieve the original input data.
Cryptographic hash functions are used to verify the authenticity of data retrieved from an untrusted source or to add a layer of security.
Public-key cryptography   Main article: Public-key cryptography  Public-key cryptography, where different keys are used for encryption and decryption.
Symmetric-key cryptosystems use the same key for encryption and decryption of a message, although a message or group of messages can have a different key than others.
A significant disadvantage of symmetric ciphers is the key management necessary to use them securely.
Each distinct pair of communicating parties must, ideally, share a different key, and perhaps for each ciphertext exchanged as well.
The number of keys required increases as the square of the number of network members, which very quickly requires complex key management schemes to keep them all consistent and secret.
Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman , authors of the first published paper on public-key cryptography.
In a groundbreaking 1976 paper, Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman proposed the notion of public-key (also, more generally, called asymmetric key ) cryptography in which two different but mathematically related keys are used—a public key and a private key.
A public key system is so constructed that calculation of one key (the 'private key') is computationally infeasible from the other (the 'public key'), even though they are necessarily related.
Instead, both keys are generated secretly, as an interrelated pair.
The historian David Kahn described public-key cryptography as "the most revolutionary new concept in the field since polyalphabetic substitution emerged in the Renaissance".
In public-key cryptosystems, the public key may be freely distributed, while its paired private key must remain secret.
In a public-key encryption system, the public key is used for encryption, while the private or secret key is used for decryption.
While Diffie and Hellman could not find such a system, they showed that public-key cryptography was indeed possible by presenting the Diffie–Hellman key exchange protocol, a solution that is now widely used in secure communications to allow two parties to secretly agree on a shared encryption key .
The X.509 standard defines the most commonly used format for public key certificates .
Diffie and Hellman's publication sparked widespread academic efforts in finding a practical public-key encryption system.
This race was finally won in 1978 by Ronald Rivest , Adi Shamir , and Len Adleman , whose solution has since become known as the RSA algorithm .
The Diffie–Hellman and RSA algorithms , in addition to being the first publicly known examples of high-quality public-key algorithms, have been among the most widely used.
Other asymmetric-key algorithms include the Cramer–Shoup cryptosystem , ElGamal encryption , and various elliptic curve techniques .
A document published in 1997 by the Government Communications Headquarters ( GCHQ ), a British intelligence organization, revealed that cryptographers at GCHQ had anticipated several academic developments.
Reportedly, around 1970, James H.
Ellis had conceived the principles of asymmetric key cryptography.
In 1973, Clifford Cocks invented a solution that was very similar in design rationale to RSA.
In 1974, Malcolm J.
Williamson is claimed to have developed the Diffie–Hellman key exchange.
In this example the message is only signed and not encrypted.
1) Alice signs a message with her private key.
2) Bob can verify that Alice sent the message and that the message has not been modified.
Public-key cryptography is also used for implementing digital signature schemes.
A digital signature is reminiscent of an ordinary signature ; they both have the characteristic of being easy for a user to produce, but difficult for anyone else to forge .
Digital signatures can also be permanently tied to the content of the message being signed; they cannot then be 'moved' from one document to another, for any attempt will be detectable.
In digital signature schemes, there are two algorithms: one for signing , in which a secret key is used to process the message (or a hash of the message, or both), and one for verification , in which the matching public key is used with the message to check the validity of the signature.
RSA and DSA are two of the most popular digital signature schemes.
Digital signatures are central to the operation of public key infrastructures and many network security schemes (e.g., SSL/TLS , many VPNs , etc.).
Public-key algorithms are most often based on the computational complexity of "hard" problems, often from number theory .
For example, the hardness of RSA is related to the integer factorization problem, while Diffie–Hellman and DSA are related to the discrete logarithm problem.
The security of elliptic curve cryptography is based on number theoretic problems involving elliptic curves .
Because of the difficulty of the underlying problems, most public-key algorithms involve operations such as modular multiplication and exponentiation, which are much more computationally expensive than the techniques used in most block ciphers, especially with typical key sizes.
As a result, public-key cryptosystems are commonly hybrid cryptosystems , in which a fast high-quality symmetric-key encryption algorithm is used for the message itself, while the relevant symmetric key is sent with the message, but encrypted using a public-key algorithm.
Similarly, hybrid signature schemes are often used, in which a cryptographic hash function is computed, and only the resulting hash is digitally signed.
Cryptographic hash functions   Cryptographic hash functions are functions that take a variable-length input and return a fixed-length output, which can be used in, for example, a digital signature.
For a hash function to be secure, it must be difficult to compute two inputs that hash to the same value ( collision resistance ) and to compute an input that hashes to a given output ( preimage resistance ).
Cryptanalysis   Main article: Cryptanalysis  Variants of the Enigma machine , used by Germany's military and civil authorities from the late 1920s through World War II , implemented a complex electro-mechanical polyalphabetic cipher .
Breaking and reading of the Enigma cipher at Poland's Cipher Bureau , for 7 years before the war, and subsequent decryption at Bletchley Park , was important to Allied victory.
The goal of cryptanalysis is to find some weakness or insecurity in a cryptographic scheme, thus permitting its subversion or evasion.
It is a common misconception that every encryption method can be broken.
In connection with his WWII work at Bell Labs , Claude Shannon proved that the one-time pad cipher is unbreakable, provided the key material is truly random , never reused, kept secret from all possible attackers, and of equal or greater length than the message.
Most ciphers , apart from the one-time pad, can be broken with enough computational effort by brute force attack , but the amount of effort needed may be exponentially dependent on the key size, as compared to the effort needed to make use of the cipher.
In such cases, effective security could be achieved if it is proven that the effort required (i.e., "work factor", in Shannon's terms) is beyond the ability of any adversary.
This means it must be shown that no efficient method (as opposed to the time-consuming brute force method) can be found to break the cipher.
Since no such proof has been found to date, the one-time-pad remains the only theoretically unbreakable cipher.
Although well-implemented one-time-pad encryption cannot be broken, traffic analysis is still possible.
There are a wide variety of cryptanalytic attacks, and they can be classified in any of several ways.
A common distinction turns on what Eve (an attacker) knows and what capabilities are available.
In a ciphertext-only attack , Eve has access only to the ciphertext (good modern cryptosystems are usually effectively immune to ciphertext-only attacks).
In a known-plaintext attack , Eve has access to a ciphertext and its corresponding plaintext (or to many such pairs).
In a chosen-plaintext attack , Eve may choose a plaintext and learn its corresponding ciphertext (perhaps many times); an example is gardening , used by the British during WWII.
In a chosen-ciphertext attack , Eve may be able to choose ciphertexts and learn their corresponding plaintexts.
Finally in a man-in-the-middle attack Eve gets in between Alice (the sender) and Bob (the recipient), accesses and modifies the traffic and then forwards it to the recipient.
Also important, often overwhelmingly so, are mistakes (generally in the design or use of one of the protocols involved).
Poznań monument ( center ) to Polish cryptanalysts whose breaking of Germany's Enigma machine ciphers, beginning in 1932, altered the course of World War II  Cryptanalysis of symmetric-key ciphers typically involves looking for attacks against the block ciphers or stream ciphers that are more efficient than any attack that could be against a perfect cipher.
For example, a simple brute force attack against DES requires one known plaintext and 2 55 decryptions, trying approximately half of the possible keys, to reach a point at which chances are better than even that the key sought will have been found.
But this may not be enough assurance; a linear cryptanalysis attack against DES requires 2 43 known plaintexts (with their corresponding ciphertexts) and approximately 2 43 DES operations.
This is a considerable improvement over brute force attacks.
Public-key algorithms are based on the computational difficulty of various problems.
The most famous of these are the difficulty of integer factorization of semiprimes and the difficulty of calculating discrete logarithms , both of which are not yet proven to be solvable in polynomial time ( P ) using only a classical Turing-complete computer.
Much public-key cryptanalysis concerns designing algorithms in P that can solve these problems, or using other technologies, such as quantum computers .
For instance, the best-known algorithms for solving the elliptic curve-based version of discrete logarithm are much more time-consuming than the best-known algorithms for factoring, at least for problems of more or less equivalent size.
Thus, to achieve an equivalent strength of encryption, techniques that depend upon the difficulty of factoring large composite numbers, such as the RSA cryptosystem, require larger keys than elliptic curve techniques.
For this reason, public-key cryptosystems based on elliptic curves have become popular since their invention in the mid-1990s.
While pure cryptanalysis uses weaknesses in the algorithms themselves, other attacks on cryptosystems are based on actual use of the algorithms in real devices, and are called side-channel attacks .
If a cryptanalyst has access to, for example, the amount of time the device took to encrypt a number of plaintexts or report an error in a password or PIN character, they may be able to use a timing attack to break a cipher that is otherwise resistant to analysis.
An attacker might also study the pattern and length of messages to derive valuable information; this is known as traffic analysis  and can be quite useful to an alert adversary.
Poor administration of a cryptosystem, such as permitting too short keys, will make any system vulnerable, regardless of other virtues.
Social engineering and other attacks against humans (e.g., bribery , extortion , blackmail , espionage , rubber-hose cryptanalysis or torture) are usually employed due to being more cost-effective and feasible to perform in a reasonable amount of time compared to pure cryptanalysis by a high margin.
Cryptographic primitives   Much of the theoretical work in cryptography concerns cryptographic primitives —algorithms with basic cryptographic properties—and their relationship to other cryptographic problems.
More complicated cryptographic tools are then built from these basic primitives.
These primitives provide fundamental properties, which are used to develop more complex tools called cryptosystems or cryptographic protocols , which guarantee one or more high-level security properties.
Note, however, that the distinction between cryptographic primitives and cryptosystems, is quite arbitrary; for example, the RSA algorithm is sometimes considered a cryptosystem, and sometimes a primitive.
Typical examples of cryptographic primitives include pseudorandom functions , one-way functions , etc.
Cryptosystems   Main article: List of cryptosystems  One or more cryptographic primitives are often used to develop a more complex algorithm, called a cryptographic system, or cryptosystem .
Cryptosystems (e.g., El-Gamal encryption ) are designed to provide particular functionality (e.g., public key encryption) while guaranteeing certain security properties (e.g., chosen-plaintext attack (CPA) security in the random oracle model ).
Cryptosystems use the properties of the underlying cryptographic primitives to support the system's security properties.
As the distinction between primitives and cryptosystems is somewhat arbitrary, a sophisticated cryptosystem can be derived from a combination of several more primitive cryptosystems.
In many cases, the cryptosystem's structure involves back and forth communication among two or more parties in space (e.g., between the sender of a secure message and its receiver) or across time (e.g., cryptographically protected backup data).
Such cryptosystems are sometimes called cryptographic protocols .
Some widely known cryptosystems include RSA, Schnorr signature , ElGamal encryption , and Pretty Good Privacy (PGP).
More complex cryptosystems include electronic cash  systems, signcryption systems, etc.
Some more 'theoretical'  cryptosystems include interactive proof systems ,  (like zero-knowledge proofs )  and systems for secret sharing ,   .
Lightweight cryptography   Lightweight cryptography (LWC) concerns cryptographic algorithms developed for a strictly constrained environment.
The growth of Internet of Things (IoT) has spiked research into the development of lightweight algorithms that are better suited for the environment.
An IoT environment requires strict constraints on power consumption, processing power, and security.
Algorithms such as PRESENT , AES , and SPECK are examples of the many LWC algorithms that have been developed to achieve the standard set by the National Institute of Standards and Technology .
Applications   This section needs expansion .
( December 2021 )  Main category: Applications of cryptography  Cryptography is widely used on the internet to help protect user-data and prevent eavesdropping.
To ensure secrecy during transmission, many systems use private key cryptography to protect transmitted information.
With public-key systems, one can maintain secrecy without a master key or a large number of keys.
But, some algorithms like Bitlocker and Veracrypt are generally not private-public key cryptography.
For example, Veracrypt uses a password hash to generate the single private key.
However, it can be configured to run in public-private key systems.
The C++ opensource encryption library OpenSSL provides free and opensource encryption software and tools.
The most commonly used encryption cipher suit is AES ,  as it has hardware acceleration for all x86 based processors that has AES-NI .
A close contender is ChaCha20-Poly1305 , which is a stream cipher , however it is commonly used for mobile devices as they are ARM based which does not feature AES-NI instruction set extension.
Cybersecurity   Cryptography can be used to secure communications by encrypting them.
Websites use encryption via HTTPS .
"End-to-end" encryption, where only sender and receiver can read messages, is implemented for email in Pretty Good Privacy and for secure messaging in general in WhatsApp , Signal and Telegram .
Operating systems use encryption to keep passwords secret, conceal parts of the system, and ensure that software updates are truly from the system maker.
Instead of storing plaintext passwords, computer systems store hashes thereof; then, when a user logs in, the system passes the given password through a cryptographic hash function and compares it to the hashed value on file.
In this manner, neither the system nor an attacker has at any point access to the password in plaintext.
Encryption is sometimes used to encrypt one's entire drive.
For example, University College London has implemented BitLocker (a program by Microsoft) to render drive data opaque without users logging in.
Cryptocurrencies and cryptoeconomics   Cryptographic techniques enable cryptocurrency technologies, such as distributed ledger technologies (e.g., blockchains ), which finance cryptoeconomics applications such as decentralized finance (DeFi) .
Key cryptographic techniques that enable cryptocurrencies and cryptoeconomics include, but are not limited to: cryptographic keys , cryptographic hash function, asymmetric (public key) encryption , Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) , End-to-End Encryption (E2EE) , and Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKP) .
Legal issues   See also: Cryptography laws in different nations  Prohibitions   Cryptography has long been of interest to intelligence gathering and law enforcement agencies .
Secret communications may be criminal or even treasonous .
Because of its facilitation of privacy , and the diminution of privacy attendant on its prohibition, cryptography is also of considerable interest to civil rights supporters.
Accordingly, there has been a history of controversial legal issues surrounding cryptography, especially since the advent of inexpensive computers has made widespread access to high-quality cryptography possible.
In some countries, even the domestic use of cryptography is, or has been, restricted.
Until 1999, France significantly restricted the use of cryptography domestically, though it has since relaxed many of these rules.
In China and Iran , a license is still required to use cryptography.
Many countries have tight restrictions on the use of cryptography.
Among the more restrictive are laws in Belarus , Kazakhstan , Mongolia , Pakistan , Singapore , Tunisia , and Vietnam .
In the United States , cryptography is legal for domestic use, but there has been much conflict over legal issues related to cryptography.
One particularly important issue has been the export of cryptography and cryptographic software and hardware.
Probably because of the importance of cryptanalysis in World War II and an expectation that cryptography would continue to be important for national security, many Western governments have, at some point, strictly regulated export of cryptography.
After World War II, it was illegal in the US to sell or distribute encryption technology overseas; in fact, encryption was designated as auxiliary military equipment and put on the United States Munitions List .
Until the development of the personal computer , asymmetric key algorithms (i.e., public key techniques), and the Internet , this was not especially problematic.
However, as the Internet grew and computers became more widely available, high-quality encryption techniques became well known around the globe.
Export controls   Main article: Export of cryptography  In the 1990s, there were several challenges to US export regulation of cryptography.
After the source code for Philip Zimmermann 's Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) encryption program found its way onto the Internet in June 1991, a complaint by RSA Security (then called RSA Data Security, Inc.) resulted in a lengthy criminal investigation of Zimmermann by the US Customs Service and the FBI , though no charges were ever filed.
Daniel J.
Bernstein , then a graduate student at UC Berkeley , brought a lawsuit against the US government challenging some aspects of the restrictions based on free speech grounds.
The 1995 case Bernstein v.
United States ultimately resulted in a 1999 decision that printed source code for cryptographic algorithms and systems was protected as free speech by the United States Constitution.
In 1996, thirty-nine countries signed the Wassenaar Arrangement , an arms control treaty that deals with the export of arms and "dual-use" technologies such as cryptography.
The treaty stipulated that the use of cryptography with short key-lengths (56-bit for symmetric encryption, 512-bit for RSA) would no longer be export-controlled.
Cryptography exports from the US became less strictly regulated as a consequence of a major relaxation in 2000;  there are no longer very many restrictions on key sizes in US- exported mass-market software.
Since this relaxation in US export restrictions, and because most personal computers connected to the Internet include US-sourced web browsers such as Firefox or Internet Explorer , almost every Internet user worldwide has potential access to quality cryptography via their browsers (e.g., via Transport Layer Security ).
The Mozilla Thunderbird and Microsoft Outlook  E-mail client programs similarly can transmit and receive emails via TLS, and can send and receive email encrypted with S/MIME .
Many Internet users do not realize that their basic application software contains such extensive cryptosystems .
These browsers and email programs are so ubiquitous that even governments whose intent is to regulate civilian use of cryptography generally do not find it practical to do much to control distribution or use of cryptography of this quality, so even when such laws are in force, actual enforcement is often effectively impossible.
NSA involvement   NSA headquarters in Fort Meade, Maryland  See also: Clipper chip  Another contentious issue connected to cryptography in the United States is the influence of the National Security Agency on cipher development and policy.
The NSA was involved with the design of DES during its development at IBM and its consideration by the National Bureau of Standards as a possible Federal Standard for cryptography.
DES was designed to be resistant to differential cryptanalysis ,  a powerful and general cryptanalytic technique known to the NSA and IBM, that became publicly known only when it was rediscovered in the late 1980s.
According to Steven Levy , IBM discovered differential cryptanalysis,  but kept the technique secret at the NSA's request.
The technique became publicly known only when Biham and Shamir re-discovered and announced it some years later.
The entire affair illustrates the difficulty of determining what resources and knowledge an attacker might actually have.
Another instance of the NSA's involvement was the 1993 Clipper chip affair, an encryption microchip intended to be part of the Capstone cryptography-control initiative.
Clipper was widely criticized by cryptographers for two reasons.
The cipher algorithm (called Skipjack ) was then classified (declassified in 1998, long after the Clipper initiative lapsed).
The classified cipher caused concerns that the NSA had deliberately made the cipher weak in order to assist its intelligence efforts.
The whole initiative was also criticized based on its violation of Kerckhoffs's Principle , as the scheme included a special escrow key held by the government for use by law enforcement (i.e.
wiretapping ).
Digital rights management   Main article: Digital rights management  Cryptography is central to digital rights management (DRM), a group of techniques for technologically controlling use of copyrighted material, being widely implemented and deployed at the behest of some copyright holders.
In 1998, U.S. President  Bill Clinton signed the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), which criminalized all production, dissemination, and use of certain cryptanalytic techniques and technology (now known or later discovered); specifically, those that could be used to circumvent DRM technological schemes.
This had a noticeable impact on the cryptography research community since an argument can be made that any cryptanalytic research violated the DMCA.
Similar statutes have since been enacted in several countries and regions, including the implementation in the EU Copyright Directive .
Similar restrictions are called for by treaties signed by World Intellectual Property Organization member-states.
The United States Department of Justice and FBI have not enforced the DMCA as rigorously as had been feared by some, but the law, nonetheless, remains a controversial one.
Niels Ferguson , a well-respected cryptography researcher, has publicly stated that he will not release some of his research into an Intel security design for fear of prosecution under the DMCA.
Cryptologist Bruce Schneier has argued that the DMCA encourages vendor lock-in , while inhibiting actual measures toward cyber-security.
Both Alan Cox (longtime Linux kernel developer) and Edward Felten (and some of his students at Princeton) have encountered problems related to the Act.
Dmitry Sklyarov was arrested during a visit to the US from Russia, and jailed for five months pending trial for alleged violations of the DMCA arising from work he had done in Russia, where the work was legal.
In 2007, the cryptographic keys responsible for Blu-ray and HD DVD content scrambling were discovered and released onto the Internet .
In both cases, the Motion Picture Association of America sent out numerous DMCA takedown notices, and there was a massive Internet backlash  triggered by the perceived impact of such notices on fair use and free speech .
Forced disclosure of encryption keys   Main article: Key disclosure law  In the United Kingdom, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act gives UK police the powers to force suspects to decrypt files or hand over passwords that protect encryption keys.
Failure to comply is an offense in its own right, punishable on conviction by a two-year jail sentence or up to five years in cases involving national security.
Successful prosecutions have occurred under the Act; the first, in 2009,  resulted in a term of 13 months' imprisonment.
Similar forced disclosure laws in Australia, Finland, France, and India compel individual suspects under investigation to hand over encryption keys or passwords during a criminal investigation.
In the United States, the federal criminal case of United States v.
Fricosu addressed whether a search warrant can compel a person to reveal an encryption  passphrase or password.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) argued that this is a violation of the protection from self-incrimination given by the Fifth Amendment .
In 2012, the court ruled that under the All Writs Act , the defendant was required to produce an unencrypted hard drive for the court.
In many jurisdictions, the legal status of forced disclosure remains unclear.
The 2016 FBI–Apple encryption dispute concerns the ability of courts in the United States to compel manufacturers' assistance in unlocking cell phones whose contents are cryptographically protected.
As a potential counter-measure to forced disclosure some cryptographic software supports plausible deniability , where the encrypted data is indistinguishable from unused random data (for example such as that of a drive which has been securely wiped ).
Branch of mathematics concerning chance and uncertainty  Not to be confused with probability theory , game theory , graph theory , or statistics .
For the mathematical field of probability specifically, see Probability theory .
For other uses, see Probability (disambiguation) .
Probability  Outline  Catalog of articles  Probabilists  Glossary  Notation  Journals  Category   Mathematics portal  v t e  Part of a series on statistics Probability theory  Probability  Axioms  Determinism  System  Indeterminism  Randomness   Probability space  Sample space  Event  Collectively exhaustive events  Elementary event  Mutual exclusivity  Outcome  Singleton  Experiment  Bernoulli trial  Probability distribution  Bernoulli distribution  Binomial distribution  Exponential distribution  Normal distribution  Pareto distribution  Poisson distribution  Probability measure  Random variable  Bernoulli process  Continuous or discrete  Expected value  Variance  Markov chain  Observed value  Random walk  Stochastic process   Complementary event  Joint probability  Marginal probability  Conditional probability   Independence  Conditional independence  Law of total probability  Law of large numbers  Bayes' theorem  Boole's inequality   Venn diagram  Tree diagram  v t e  Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  The probabilities of rolling several numbers using two dice  Probability is the branch of mathematics concerning events and numerical descriptions of how likely they are to occur.
The probability of an event is a number between 0 and 1; the larger the probability, the more likely an event is to occur.
The higher the probability of an event, the more likely it is that the event will occur.
A simple example is the tossing of a fair (unbiased) coin.
Since the coin is fair, the two outcomes ("heads" and "tails") are both equally probable; the probability of "heads" equals the probability of "tails"; and since no other outcomes are possible, the probability of either "heads" or "tails" is 1/2 (which could also be written as 0.5 or 50%).
These concepts have been given an axiomatic mathematical formalization in probability theory , which is used widely in areas of study such as statistics , mathematics , science , finance , gambling , artificial intelligence , machine learning , computer science , game theory , and philosophy to, for example, draw inferences about the expected frequency of events.
Probability theory is also used to describe the underlying mechanics and regularities of complex systems .
Interpretations   Main article: Probability interpretations  When dealing with random experiments – i.e., experiments that are random and well-defined – in a purely theoretical setting (like tossing a coin), probabilities can be numerically described by the number of desired outcomes, divided by the total number of all outcomes.
This is referred to as theoretical probability (in contrast to empirical probability , dealing with probabilities in the context of real experiments).
For example, tossing a coin twice will yield "head-head", "head-tail", "tail-head", and "tail-tail" outcomes.
The probability of getting an outcome of "head-head" is 1 out of 4 outcomes, or, in numerical terms, 1/4, 0.25 or 25%.
However, when it comes to practical application, there are two major competing categories of probability interpretations, whose adherents hold different views about the fundamental nature of probability:  Objectivists assign numbers to describe some objective or physical state of affairs.
The most popular version of objective probability is frequentist probability , which claims that the probability of a random event denotes the relative frequency of occurrence of an experiment's outcome when the experiment is repeated indefinitely.
This interpretation considers probability to be the relative frequency "in the long run" of outcomes.
A modification of this is propensity probability , which interprets probability as the tendency of some experiment to yield a certain outcome, even if it is performed only once.
Subjectivists assign numbers per subjective probability, that is, as a degree of belief .
The degree of belief has been interpreted as "the price at which you would buy or sell a bet that pays 1 unit of utility if E, 0 if not E",  although that interpretation is not universally agreed upon.
The most popular version of subjective probability is Bayesian probability , which includes expert knowledge as well as experimental data to produce probabilities.
The expert knowledge is represented by some (subjective) prior probability distribution .
These data are incorporated in a likelihood function .
The product of the prior and the likelihood, when normalized, results in a posterior probability distribution that incorporates all the information known to date.
By Aumann's agreement theorem , Bayesian agents whose prior beliefs are similar will end up with similar posterior beliefs.
However, sufficiently different priors can lead to different conclusions, regardless of how much information the agents share.
Etymology   See also: History of probability § Etymology , and Glossary of probability and statistics  Further information: Likelihood  The word probability  derives from the Latin probabilitas , which can also mean " probity ", a measure of the authority of a witness in a legal case in Europe , and often correlated with the witness's nobility .
In a sense, this differs much from the modern meaning of probability , which in contrast is a measure of the weight of empirical evidence , and is arrived at from inductive reasoning and statistical inference .
History   Main article: History of probability  Further information: History of statistics  The scientific study of probability is a modern development of mathematics .
Gambling shows that there has been an interest in quantifying the ideas of probability throughout history, but exact mathematical descriptions arose much later.
There are reasons for the slow development of the mathematics of probability.
Whereas games of chance provided the impetus for the mathematical study of probability, fundamental issues  are still obscured by superstitions.
According to Richard Jeffrey , "Before the middle of the seventeenth century, the term 'probable' (Latin probabilis ) meant approvable , and was applied in that sense, univocally, to opinion and to action.
A probable action or opinion was one such as sensible people would undertake or hold, in the circumstances."
However, in legal contexts especially, 'probable' could also apply to propositions for which there was good evidence.
Gerolamo Cardano (16th century)  Christiaan Huygens published one of the first books on probability (17th century).
The sixteenth-century Italian polymath Gerolamo Cardano demonstrated the efficacy of defining odds as the ratio of favourable to unfavourable outcomes (which implies that the probability of an event is given by the ratio of favourable outcomes to the total number of possible outcomes  ).
Aside from the elementary work by Cardano, the doctrine of probabilities dates to the correspondence of Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal (1654).
Christiaan Huygens (1657) gave the earliest known scientific treatment of the subject.
Jakob Bernoulli 's Ars Conjectandi (posthumous, 1713) and Abraham de Moivre 's Doctrine of Chances (1718) treated the subject as a branch of mathematics.
See Ian Hacking 's The Emergence of Probability  and James Franklin's  The Science of Conjecture  for histories of the early development of the very concept of mathematical probability.
The theory of errors may be traced back to Roger Cotes 's Opera Miscellanea (posthumous, 1722), but a memoir prepared by Thomas Simpson in 1755 (printed 1756) first applied the theory to the discussion of errors of observation.
The reprint (1757) of this memoir lays down the axioms that positive and negative errors are equally probable, and that certain assignable limits define the range of all errors.
Simpson also discusses continuous errors and describes a probability curve.
The first two laws of error that were proposed both originated with Pierre-Simon Laplace .
The first law was published in 1774, and stated that the frequency of an error could be expressed as an exponential function of the numerical magnitude of the error – disregarding sign.
The second law of error was proposed in 1778 by Laplace, and stated that the frequency of the error is an exponential function of the square of the error.
The second law of error is called the normal distribution or the Gauss law.
"It is difficult historically to attribute that law to Gauss, who in spite of his well-known precocity had probably not made this discovery before he was two years old."
Daniel Bernoulli (1778) introduced the principle of the maximum product of the probabilities of a system of concurrent errors.
Carl Friedrich Gauss  Adrien-Marie Legendre (1805) developed the method of least squares , and introduced it in his Nouvelles méthodes pour la détermination des orbites des comètes ( New Methods for Determining the Orbits of Comets ).
In ignorance of Legendre's contribution, an Irish-American writer, Robert Adrain , editor of "The Analyst" (1808), first deduced the law of facility of error,     ϕ  (  x  )  =  c   e   −   h   2     x   2      ,    {\displaystyle \phi (x)=ce^{-h^{2}x^{2}},}    where     h    {\displaystyle h}   is a constant depending on precision of observation, and     c    {\displaystyle c}   is a scale factor ensuring that the area under the curve equals 1.
He gave two proofs, the second being essentially the same as John Herschel 's (1850).
Gauss gave the first proof that seems to have been known in Europe (the third after Adrain's) in 1809.
Further proofs were given by Laplace (1810, 1812), Gauss (1823), James Ivory (1825, 1826), Hagen (1837), Friedrich Bessel (1838), W.F.
Donkin (1844, 1856), and Morgan Crofton (1870).
Other contributors were Ellis (1844), De Morgan (1864), Glaisher (1872), and Giovanni Schiaparelli (1875).
Peters 's (1856) formula  for r , the probable error of a single observation, is well known.
In the nineteenth century, authors on the general theory included Laplace , Sylvestre Lacroix (1816), Littrow (1833), Adolphe Quetelet (1853), Richard Dedekind (1860), Helmert (1872), Hermann Laurent (1873), Liagre, Didion and Karl Pearson .
Augustus De Morgan and George Boole improved the exposition of the theory.
In 1906, Andrey Markov introduced  the notion of Markov chains , which played an important role in stochastic processes theory and its applications.
The modern theory of probability based on measure theory was developed by Andrey Kolmogorov in 1931.
On the geometric side, contributors to The Educational Times included Miller, Crofton, McColl, Wolstenholme, Watson, and Artemas Martin .
See integral geometry for more information.
Theory   Main article: Probability theory  Like other theories , the theory of probability is a representation of its concepts in formal terms – that is, in terms that can be considered separately from their meaning.
These formal terms are manipulated by the rules of mathematics and logic, and any results are interpreted or translated back into the problem domain.
There have been at least two successful attempts to formalize probability, namely the Kolmogorov formulation and the Cox formulation.
In Kolmogorov's formulation (see also probability space ), sets are interpreted as events and probability as a measure on a class of sets.
In Cox's theorem , probability is taken as a primitive (i.e., not further analyzed), and the emphasis is on constructing a consistent assignment of probability values to propositions.
In both cases, the laws of probability are the same, except for technical details.
There are other methods for quantifying uncertainty, such as the Dempster–Shafer theory or possibility theory , but those are essentially different and not compatible with the usually-understood laws of probability.
Applications   Probability theory is applied in everyday life in risk assessment and modeling .
The insurance industry and markets use actuarial science to determine pricing and make trading decisions.
Governments apply probabilistic methods in environmental regulation , entitlement analysis, and financial regulation .
An example of the use of probability theory in equity trading is the effect of the perceived probability of any widespread Middle East conflict on oil prices, which have ripple effects in the economy as a whole.
An assessment by a commodity trader that a war is more likely can send that commodity's prices up or down, and signals other traders of that opinion.
Accordingly, the probabilities are neither assessed independently nor necessarily rationally.
The theory of behavioral finance emerged to describe the effect of such groupthink on pricing, on policy, and on peace and conflict.
In addition to financial assessment, probability can be used to analyze trends in biology (e.g., disease spread) as well as ecology (e.g., biological Punnett squares ).
As with finance, risk assessment can be used as a statistical tool to calculate the likelihood of undesirable events occurring, and can assist with implementing protocols to avoid encountering such circumstances.
Probability is used to design games of chance so that casinos can make a guaranteed profit, yet provide payouts to players that are frequent enough to encourage continued play.
Another significant application of probability theory in everyday life is reliability .
Many consumer products, such as automobiles and consumer electronics, use reliability theory in product design to reduce the probability of failure.
Failure probability may influence a manufacturer's decisions on a product's warranty .
The cache language model and other statistical language models that are used in natural language processing are also examples of applications of probability theory.
Mathematical treatment   Calculation of probability (risk) vs odds  See also: Probability axioms  Consider an experiment that can produce a number of results.
The collection of all possible results is called the sample space of the experiment, sometimes denoted as     Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   .
The power set of the sample space is formed by considering all different collections of possible results.
For example, rolling a die can produce six possible results.
One collection of possible results gives an odd number on the die.
These collections are called "events".
In this case, {1,3,5} is the event that the die falls on some odd number.
If the results that actually occur fall in a given event, the event is said to have occurred.
A probability is a way of assigning every event a value between zero and one, with the requirement that the event made up of all possible results (in our example, the event {1,2,3,4,5,6}) is assigned a value of one.
To qualify as a probability, the assignment of values must satisfy the requirement that for any collection of mutually exclusive events (events with no common results, such as the events {1,6}, {3}, and {2,4}), the probability that at least one of the events will occur is given by the sum of the probabilities of all the individual events.
The probability of an event  A is written as     P  (  A  )    {\displaystyle P(A)}   ,       p  (  A  )    {\displaystyle p(A)}   , or      Pr   (  A  )    {\displaystyle {\text{Pr}}(A)}   .
This mathematical definition of probability can extend to infinite sample spaces, and even uncountable sample spaces, using the concept of a measure.
The opposite or complement of an event A is the event  (that is, the event of A not occurring), often denoted as      A  ′   ,   A   c      {\displaystyle A',A^{c}}   ,       A  ¯    ,   A   ∁    ,  ¬  A    {\displaystyle {\overline {A}},A^{\complement },\neg A}   , or      ∼   A    {\displaystyle {\sim }A}   ; its probability is given by P (not A ) = 1 − P ( A ) .
As an example, the chance of not rolling a six on a six-sided die is 1 – (chance of rolling a six) =  1 − 1 / 6 = 5 / 6 .
For a more comprehensive treatment, see Complementary event .
If two events A and B occur on a single performance of an experiment, this is called the intersection or joint probability of A and B , denoted as     P  (  A  ∩  B  )  .
{\displaystyle P(A\cap B).}
Independent events   If two events, A and B are independent then the joint probability is       P  (  A    and    B  )  =  P  (  A  ∩  B  )  =  P  (  A  )  P  (  B  )  .
{\displaystyle P(A{\mbox{ and }}B)=P(A\cap B)=P(A)P(B).}
Events A and B depicted as independent vs non-independent in space Ω.
For example, if two coins are flipped, then the chance of both being heads is        1  2     ×     1  2     =     1  4     .
{\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}\times {\tfrac {1}{2}}={\tfrac {1}{4}}.}
Mutually exclusive events   Main article: Mutual exclusivity  If either event A or event B can occur but never both simultaneously, then they are called mutually exclusive events.
If two events are mutually exclusive , then the probability of both occurring is denoted as     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\cap B)}   and     P  (  A    and    B  )  =  P  (  A  ∩  B  )  =  0    {\displaystyle P(A{\mbox{ and }}B)=P(A\cap B)=0}   If two events are mutually exclusive , then the probability of either occurring is denoted as     P  (  A  ∪  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\cup B)}   and     P  (  A    or    B  )  =  P  (  A  ∪  B  )  =  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B  )  −  P  (  A  ∩  B  )  =  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B  )  −  0  =  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A{\mbox{ or }}B)=P(A\cup B)=P(A)+P(B)-P(A\cap B)=P(A)+P(B)-0=P(A)+P(B)}   For example, the chance of rolling a 1 or 2 on a six-sided die is     P  (  1    or    2  )  =  P  (  1  )  +  P  (  2  )  =     1  6     +     1  6     =     1  3     .
{\displaystyle P(1{\mbox{ or }}2)=P(1)+P(2)={\tfrac {1}{6}}+{\tfrac {1}{6}}={\tfrac {1}{3}}.}
Not (necessarily) mutually exclusive events   If the events are not (necessarily) mutually exclusive then     P   (   A    or    B   )   =  P  (  A  ∪  B  )  =  P   (  A  )   +  P   (  B  )   −  P   (   A    and    B   )   .
{\displaystyle P\left(A{\hbox{ or }}B\right)=P(A\cup B)=P\left(A\right)+P\left(B\right)-P\left(A{\mbox{ and }}B\right).}
Rewritten,     P   (   A  ∪  B   )   =  P   (  A  )   +  P   (  B  )   −  P   (   A  ∩  B   )     {\displaystyle P\left(A\cup B\right)=P\left(A\right)+P\left(B\right)-P\left(A\cap B\right)}   For example, when drawing a card from a deck of cards, the chance of getting a heart or a face card (J, Q, K) (or both) is        13  52     +     12  52     −     3  52     =     11  26     ,    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {13}{52}}+{\tfrac {12}{52}}-{\tfrac {3}{52}}={\tfrac {11}{26}},}   since among the 52 cards of a deck, 13 are hearts, 12 are face cards, and 3 are both: here the possibilities included in the "3 that are both" are included in each of the "13 hearts" and the "12 face cards", but should only be counted once.
This can be expanded further for multiple not (necessarily) mutually exclusive events.
For three events, this proceeds as follows:         P   (   A  ∪  B  ∪  C   )   =    P   (    (   A  ∪  B   )   ∪  C   )       =    P   (   A  ∪  B   )   +  P   (  C  )   −  P   (    (   A  ∪  B   )   ∩  C   )       =    P   (  A  )   +  P   (  B  )   −  P   (   A  ∩  B   )   +  P   (  C  )   −  P   (    (   A  ∩  C   )   ∪   (   B  ∩  C   )    )       =    P   (  A  )   +  P   (  B  )   +  P   (  C  )   −  P   (   A  ∩  B   )   −   (   P   (   A  ∩  C   )   +  P   (   B  ∩  C   )   −  P   (    (   A  ∩  C   )   ∩   (   B  ∩  C   )    )    )       P   (   A  ∪  B  ∪  C   )   =    P   (  A  )   +  P   (  B  )   +  P   (  C  )   −  P   (   A  ∩  B   )   −  P   (   A  ∩  C   )   −  P   (   B  ∩  C   )   +  P   (   A  ∩  B  ∩  C   )         {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P\left(A\cup B\cup C\right)=&P\left(\left(A\cup B\right)\cup C\right)\\=&P\left(A\cup B\right)+P\left(C\right)-P\left(\left(A\cup B\right)\cap C\right)\\=&P\left(A\right)+P\left(B\right)-P\left(A\cap B\right)+P\left(C\right)-P\left(\left(A\cap C\right)\cup \left(B\cap C\right)\right)\\=&P\left(A\right)+P\left(B\right)+P\left(C\right)-P\left(A\cap B\right)-\left(P\left(A\cap C\right)+P\left(B\cap C\right)-P\left(\left(A\cap C\right)\cap \left(B\cap C\right)\right)\right)\\P\left(A\cup B\cup C\right)=&P\left(A\right)+P\left(B\right)+P\left(C\right)-P\left(A\cap B\right)-P\left(A\cap C\right)-P\left(B\cap C\right)+P\left(A\cap B\cap C\right)\end{aligned}}}   It can be seen, then, that this pattern can be repeated for any number of events.
Conditional probability   Conditional probability is the probability of some event A , given the occurrence of some other event B .
Conditional probability is written     P  (  A  ∣  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\mid B)}   , and is read "the probability of A , given B ".
It is defined by       P  (  A  ∣  B  )  =     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    P  (  B  )     .
{\displaystyle P(A\mid B)={\frac {P(A\cap B)}{P(B)}}.\,}   If     P  (  B  )  =  0    {\displaystyle P(B)=0}   then     P  (  A  ∣  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\mid B)}   is formally undefined by this expression.
In this case     A    {\displaystyle A}   and     B    {\displaystyle B}   are independent, since     P  (  A  ∩  B  )  =  P  (  A  )  P  (  B  )  =  0.
{\displaystyle P(A\cap B)=P(A)P(B)=0.}
However, it is possible to define a conditional probability for some zero-probability events, for example by using a σ-algebra of such events (such as those arising from a continuous random variable ).
For example, in a bag of 2 red balls and 2 blue balls (4 balls in total), the probability of taking a red ball is     1   /   2  ;    {\displaystyle 1/2;}   however, when taking a second ball, the probability of it being either a red ball or a blue ball depends on the ball previously taken.
For example, if a red ball was taken, then the probability of picking a red ball again would be     1   /   3  ,    {\displaystyle 1/3,}   since only 1 red and 2 blue balls would have been remaining.
And if a blue ball was taken previously, the probability of taking a red ball will be     2   /   3.
{\displaystyle 2/3.}
Inverse probability   In probability theory and applications, Bayes' rule relates the odds of event      A   1      {\displaystyle A_{1}}   to event      A   2    ,    {\displaystyle A_{2},}   before (prior to) and after (posterior to) conditioning on another event     B  .
{\displaystyle B.}
The odds on      A   1      {\displaystyle A_{1}}   to event      A   2      {\displaystyle A_{2}}   is simply the ratio of the probabilities of the two events.
When arbitrarily many events     A    {\displaystyle A}   are of interest, not just two, the rule can be rephrased as posterior is proportional to prior times likelihood ,     P  (  A   |   B  )  ∝  P  (  A  )  P  (  B   |   A  )    {\displaystyle P(A|B)\propto P(A)P(B|A)}   where the proportionality symbol means that the left hand side is proportional to (i.e., equals a constant times) the right hand side as     A    {\displaystyle A}   varies, for fixed or given     B    {\displaystyle B}   (Lee, 2012; Bertsch McGrayne, 2012).
In this form it goes back to Laplace (1774) and to Cournot (1843); see Fienberg (2005).
See Inverse probability and Bayes' rule .
Summary of probabilities   Summary of probabilities  Event  Probability   A      P  (  A  )  ∈      {\displaystyle P(A)\in }      not A      P  (   A   ∁    )  =  1  −  P  (  A  )     {\displaystyle P(A^{\complement })=1-P(A)\,}      A or B          P  (  A  ∪  B  )     =  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B  )  −  P  (  A  ∩  B  )      P  (  A  ∪  B  )     =  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B  )     if A and B are mutually exclusive          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P(A\cup B)&=P(A)+P(B)-P(A\cap B)\\P(A\cup B)&=P(A)+P(B)\qquad {\mbox{if A and B are mutually exclusive}}\\\end{aligned}}}      A and B          P  (  A  ∩  B  )     =  P  (  A   |   B  )  P  (  B  )  =  P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )      P  (  A  ∩  B  )     =  P  (  A  )  P  (  B  )     if A and B are independent          {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P(A\cap B)&=P(A|B)P(B)=P(B|A)P(A)\\P(A\cap B)&=P(A)P(B)\qquad {\mbox{if A and B are independent}}\\\end{aligned}}}      A given B      P  (  A  ∣  B  )  =     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    P  (  B  )     =     P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )    P  (  B  )        {\displaystyle P(A\mid B)={\frac {P(A\cap B)}{P(B)}}={\frac {P(B|A)P(A)}{P(B)}}\,}     Relation to randomness and probability in quantum mechanics   Main article: Randomness  See also: Quantum fluctuation § Interpretations  In a deterministic universe, based on Newtonian concepts, there would be no probability if all conditions were known ( Laplace's demon ) (but there are situations in which sensitivity to initial conditions exceeds our ability to measure them, i.e.
know them).
In the case of a roulette wheel, if the force of the hand and the period of that force are known, the number on which the ball will stop would be a certainty (though as a practical matter, this would likely be true only of a roulette wheel that had not been exactly levelled – as Thomas A.
Bass' Newtonian Casino revealed).
This also assumes knowledge of inertia and friction of the wheel, weight, smoothness, and roundness of the ball, variations in hand speed during the turning, and so forth.
A probabilistic description can thus be more useful than Newtonian mechanics for analyzing the pattern of outcomes of repeated rolls of a roulette wheel.
Physicists face the same situation in the kinetic theory of gases , where the system, while deterministic in principle , is so complex (with the number of molecules typically the order of magnitude of the Avogadro constant  6.02 × 10 23 ) that only a statistical description of its properties is feasible.
Probability theory is required to describe quantum phenomena.
A revolutionary discovery of early 20th century physics was the random character of all physical processes that occur at sub-atomic scales and are governed by the laws of quantum mechanics .
The objective wave function evolves deterministically but, according to the Copenhagen interpretation , it deals with probabilities of observing, the outcome being explained by a wave function collapse when an observation is made.
However, the loss of determinism for the sake of instrumentalism did not meet with universal approval.
Albert Einstein famously remarked in a letter to Max Born : "I am convinced that God does not play dice".
Like Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger , who discovered the wave function, believed quantum mechanics is a statistical approximation of an underlying deterministic reality .
In some modern interpretations of the statistical mechanics of measurement, quantum decoherence is invoked to account for the appearance of subjectively probabilistic experimental outcomes.
Exploring properties of the integers with complex analysis  Riemann zeta function ζ ( s ) in the complex plane .
The color of a point s encodes the value of ζ ( s ): colors close to black denote values close to zero, while hue encodes the value's argument .
In mathematics , analytic number theory is a branch of number theory that uses methods from mathematical analysis to solve problems about the integers .
It is often said to have begun with Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet 's 1837 introduction of Dirichlet L -functions to give the first proof of Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions .
It is well known for its results on prime numbers (involving the Prime Number Theorem and Riemann zeta function ) and additive number theory (such as the Goldbach conjecture and Waring's problem ).
Branches of analytic number theory   Analytic number theory can be split up into two major parts, divided more by the type of problems they attempt to solve than fundamental differences in technique.
Multiplicative number theory deals with the distribution of the prime numbers , such as estimating the number of primes in an interval, and includes the prime number theorem and Dirichlet's theorem on primes in arithmetic progressions .
Additive number theory is concerned with the additive structure of the integers, such as Goldbach's conjecture that every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two primes.
One of the main results in additive number theory is the solution to Waring's problem .
History   Precursors   Much of analytic number theory was inspired by the prime number theorem .
Let π( x ) be the prime-counting function that gives the number of primes less than or equal to x , for any real number x .
For example, π(10) = 4 because there are four prime numbers (2, 3, 5 and 7) less than or equal to 10.
The prime number theorem then states that x / ln( x ) is a good approximation to π( x ), in the sense that the limit of the quotient of the two functions π( x ) and x / ln( x ) as x approaches infinity is 1:       lim   x  →  ∞       π  (  x  )    x   /   ln  ⁡  (  x  )     =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\pi (x)}{x/\ln(x)}}=1,}    known as the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers.
Adrien-Marie Legendre conjectured in 1797 or 1798 that π( a ) is approximated by the function a /( A ln( a ) + B ), where A and B are unspecified constants.
In the second edition of his book on number theory (1808) he then made a more precise conjecture, with A = 1 and B ≈ −1.08366.
Carl Friedrich Gauss considered the same question: "Im Jahr 1792 oder 1793" ('in the year 1792 or 1793'), according to his own recollection nearly sixty years later in a letter to Encke (1849), he  wrote in his logarithm table (he was then 15 or 16) the short note "Primzahlen unter     a  (  =  ∞  )    a   ln  ⁡  a       {\displaystyle a(=\infty ){\frac {a}{\ln a}}}   " ('prime numbers under     a  (  =  ∞  )    a   ln  ⁡  a       {\displaystyle a(=\infty ){\frac {a}{\ln a}}}   ').
But Gauss never published this conjecture.
In 1838 Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet came up with his own approximating function,  the logarithmic integral li( x ) (under the slightly different form of a series, which he communicated to Gauss).
Both Legendre's and Dirichlet's formulas imply the same conjectured asymptotic equivalence of π( x ) and x / ln( x ) stated above, although it turned out that Dirichlet's approximation is considerably better if one considers the differences instead of quotients.
Dirichlet   Main article: Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet  Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet is credited with the creation of analytic number theory,  a field in which he found several deep results and in proving them introduced some fundamental tools, many of which were later named after him.
In 1837 he published Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions , using mathematical analysis concepts to tackle an algebraic problem and thus creating the branch of analytic number theory.
In proving the theorem, he introduced the Dirichlet characters and L-functions .
In 1841 he generalized his arithmetic progressions theorem from integers to the ring of Gaussian integers       Z       {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   .
Chebyshev   Main article: Pafnuty Chebyshev  In two papers from 1848 and 1850, the Russian mathematician Pafnuty L'vovich Chebyshev attempted to prove the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers.
His work is notable for the use of the zeta function ζ( s ) (for real values of the argument "s", as are works of Leonhard Euler , as early as 1737) predating Riemann's celebrated memoir of 1859, and he succeeded in proving a slightly weaker form of the asymptotic law, namely, that if the limit of π( x )/( x /ln( x )) as x goes to infinity exists at all, then it is necessarily equal to one.
He was able to prove unconditionally that this ratio is bounded above and below by two explicitly given constants near to 1 for all x .
Although Chebyshev's paper did not prove the Prime Number Theorem, his estimates for π( x ) were strong enough for him to prove Bertrand's postulate that there exists a prime number between n and 2 n for any integer n ≥ 2.
Riemann   Main article: Bernhard Riemann    " …es ist sehr wahrscheinlich, dass alle Wurzeln reell sind.
Hiervon wäre allerdings ein strenger Beweis zu wünschen; ich habe indess die Aufsuchung desselben nach einigen flüchtigen vergeblichen Versuchen vorläufig bei Seite gelassen, da er für den nächsten Zweck meiner Untersuchung entbehrlich schien.
"
"…it is very probable that all roots are real.
Of course one would wish for a rigorous proof here; I have for the time being, after some fleeting vain attempts, provisionally put aside the search for this, as it appears dispensable for the next objective of my investigation."
Riemann's statement of the Riemann hypothesis, from his 1859 paper.
(He was discussing a version of the zeta function, modified so that its roots are real rather than on the critical line.
See, Riemann Xi Function.)
Bernhard Riemann made some famous contributions to modern analytic number theory.
In a single short paper (the only one he published on the subject of number theory), he investigated the Riemann zeta function and established its importance for understanding the distribution of prime numbers .
He made a series of conjectures about properties of the zeta function , one of which is the well-known Riemann hypothesis .
Hadamard and de la Vallée-Poussin   Main articles: Jacques Hadamard and Charles Jean de la Vallée-Poussin  Extending the ideas of Riemann, two proofs of the prime number theorem were obtained independently by Jacques Hadamard and Charles Jean de la Vallée-Poussin and appeared in the same year (1896).
Both proofs used methods from complex analysis, establishing as a main step of the proof that the Riemann zeta function ζ( s ) is non-zero for all complex values of the variable s that have the form s = 1 + it with t > 0.
Modern times   The biggest technical change after 1950 has been the development of sieve methods ,  particularly in multiplicative problems.
These are combinatorial in nature, and quite varied.
The extremal branch of combinatorial theory has in return been greatly influenced by the value placed in analytic number theory on quantitative upper and lower bounds.
Another recent development is probabilistic number theory ,  which uses methods from probability theory to estimate the distribution of number theoretic functions, such as how many prime divisors a number has.
Specifically, the breakthroughs by Yitang Zhang , James Maynard , Terence Tao and Ben Green have all used the Goldston – Pintz – Yıldırım method, which they originally used to prove that             p   n  +  1    −   p   n    ≥  o  (  log  ⁡   p   n    )  .
{\displaystyle p_{n+1}-p_{n}\geq o(\log p_{n}).}
Developments within analytic number theory are often refinements of earlier techniques, which reduce the error terms and widen their applicability.
For example, the circle method of Hardy and Littlewood was conceived as applying to power series near the unit circle in the complex plane ; it is now thought of in terms of finite exponential sums (that is, on the unit circle, but with the power series truncated).
The needs of Diophantine approximation are for auxiliary functions that are not generating functions —their coefficients are constructed by use of a pigeonhole principle —and involve several complex variables .
The fields of Diophantine approximation and transcendence theory have expanded, to the point that the techniques have been applied to the Mordell conjecture .
Problems and results   Theorems and results within analytic number theory tend not to be exact structural results about the integers, for which algebraic and geometrical tools are more appropriate.
Instead, they give approximate bounds and estimates for various number theoretical functions, as the following examples illustrate.
Multiplicative number theory   Main article: Multiplicative number theory  Euclid showed that there are infinitely many prime numbers.
An important question is to determine the asymptotic distribution of the prime numbers; that is, a rough description of how many primes are smaller than a given number.
Gauss , amongst others, after computing a large list of primes, conjectured that the number of primes less than or equal to a large number N is close to the value of the integral        ∫   2    N      1   log  ⁡  t      d  t  .
{\displaystyle \int _{2}^{N}{\frac {1}{\log t}}\,dt.}
In 1859 Bernhard Riemann used complex analysis and a special meromorphic function now known as the Riemann zeta function to derive an analytic expression for the number of primes less than or equal to a real number x .
Remarkably, the main term in Riemann's formula was exactly the above integral, lending substantial weight to Gauss's conjecture.
Riemann found that the error terms in this expression, and hence the manner in which the primes are distributed, are closely related to the complex zeros of the zeta function.
Using Riemann's ideas and by getting more information on the zeros of the zeta function, Jacques Hadamard and Charles Jean de la Vallée-Poussin managed to complete the proof of Gauss's conjecture.
In particular, they proved that if      π  (  x  )  =  (   number of primes   ≤  x  )  ,    {\displaystyle \pi (x)=({\text{number of primes }}\leq x),}    then       lim   x  →  ∞       π  (  x  )    x   /   log  ⁡  x     =  1.
{\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\pi (x)}{x/\log x}}=1.}
This remarkable result is what is now known as the prime number theorem .
It is a central result in analytic number theory.
Loosely speaking, it states that given a large number N , the number of primes less than or equal to N is about N /log( N ).
More generally, the same question can be asked about the number of primes in any arithmetic progression  a+nq for any integer n .
In one of the first applications of analytic techniques to number theory, Dirichlet proved that any arithmetic progression with a and q coprime contains infinitely many primes.
The prime number theorem can be generalised to this problem; letting      π  (  x  ,  a  ,  q  )  =  (   number of primes   ≤  x   such that   p   is in the arithmetic progression   a  +  n  q  ,  n  ∈   Z   )  ,    {\displaystyle \pi (x,a,q)=({\text{number of primes }}\leq x{\text{ such that }}p{\text{ is in the arithmetic progression }}a+nq,n\in \mathbf {Z} ),}    then if a and q are coprime,       lim   x  →  ∞       π  (  x  ,  a  ,  q  )  ϕ  (  q  )    x   /   log  ⁡  x     =  1.
{\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\pi (x,a,q)\phi (q)}{x/\log x}}=1.}
There are also many deep and wide-ranging conjectures in number theory whose proofs seem too difficult for current techniques, such as the twin prime conjecture which asks whether there are infinitely many primes p such that p + 2 is prime.
On the assumption of the Elliott–Halberstam conjecture it has been proven recently that there are infinitely many primes p such that p + k is prime for some positive even k at most 12.
Also, it has been proven unconditionally (i.e.
not depending on unproven conjectures) that there are infinitely many primes p such that p + k is prime for some positive even k at most 246.
Additive number theory   Main article: Additive number theory  One of the most important problems in additive number theory is Waring's problem , which asks whether it is possible, for any k ≥ 2, to write any positive integer as the sum of a bounded number of k th powers,      n  =   x   1    k    +  ⋯  +   x   ℓ    k    .
{\displaystyle n=x_{1}^{k}+\cdots +x_{\ell }^{k}.}
The case for squares, k = 2, was answered by Lagrange in 1770, who proved that every positive integer is the sum of at most four squares.
The general case was proved by Hilbert in 1909, using algebraic techniques which gave no explicit bounds.
An important breakthrough was the application of analytic tools to the problem by Hardy and Littlewood .
These techniques are known as the circle method, and give explicit upper bounds for the function G ( k ), the smallest number of k th powers needed, such as Vinogradov 's bound      G  (  k  )  ≤  k  (  3  log  ⁡  k  +  11  )  .
{\displaystyle G(k)\leq k(3\log k+11).}
Diophantine problems   Main article: Diophantine problem  Diophantine problems are concerned with integer solutions to polynomial equations: one may study the distribution of solutions, that is, counting solutions according to some measure of "size" or height .
An important example is the Gauss circle problem , which asks for integers points ( x  y ) which satisfy       x   2    +   y   2    ≤   r   2    .
{\displaystyle x^{2}+y^{2}\leq r^{2}.}
In geometrical terms, given a circle centered about the origin in the plane with radius r , the problem asks how many integer lattice points lie on or inside the circle.
It is not hard to prove that the answer is     π   r   2    +  E  (  r  )    {\displaystyle \pi r^{2}+E(r)}   , where     E  (  r  )   /    r   2    →  0    {\displaystyle E(r)/r^{2}\to 0}   as     r  →  ∞    {\displaystyle r\to \infty }   .
Again, the difficult part and a great achievement of analytic number theory is obtaining specific upper bounds on the error term E ( r ).
It was shown by Gauss that     E  (  r  )  =  O  (  r  )    {\displaystyle E(r)=O(r)}   .
In general, an O ( r ) error term would be possible with the unit circle (or, more properly, the closed unit disk) replaced by the dilates of any bounded planar region with piecewise smooth boundary.
Furthermore, replacing the unit circle by the unit square, the error term for the general problem can be as large as a linear function of r .
Therefore, getting an error bound of the form     O  (   r   δ    )    {\displaystyle O(r^{\delta })}   for some     δ  <  1    {\displaystyle \delta <1}   in the case of the circle is a significant improvement.
The first to attain this was Sierpiński in 1906, who showed     E  (  r  )  =  O  (   r   2   /   3    )    {\displaystyle E(r)=O(r^{2/3})}   .
In 1915, Hardy and Landau each showed that one does not have     E  (  r  )  =  O  (   r   1   /   2    )    {\displaystyle E(r)=O(r^{1/2})}   .
Since then the goal has been to show that for each fixed     ϵ  >  0    {\displaystyle \epsilon >0}   there exists a real number     C  (  ϵ  )    {\displaystyle C(\epsilon )}   such that     E  (  r  )  ≤  C  (  ϵ  )   r   1   /   2  +  ϵ      {\displaystyle E(r)\leq C(\epsilon )r^{1/2+\epsilon }}   .
In 2000 Huxley showed  that     E  (  r  )  =  O  (   r   131   /   208    )    {\displaystyle E(r)=O(r^{131/208})}   , which is the best published result.
Methods of analytic number theory   Dirichlet series   Main article: Dirichlet series  One of the most useful tools in multiplicative number theory are Dirichlet series , which are functions of a complex variable defined by an infinite series of the form      f  (  s  )  =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞     a   n     n   −  s    .
{\displaystyle f(s)=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }a_{n}n^{-s}.}
Depending on the choice of coefficients      a   n      {\displaystyle a_{n}}   , this series may converge everywhere, nowhere, or on some half plane.
In many cases, even where the series does not converge everywhere, the holomorphic function it defines may be analytically continued to a meromorphic function on the entire complex plane.
The utility of functions like this in multiplicative problems can be seen in the formal identity       (    ∑   n  =  1    ∞     a   n     n   −  s     )    (    ∑   n  =  1    ∞     b   n     n   −  s     )   =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞     (    ∑   k  ℓ  =  n     a   k     b   ℓ     )    n   −  s    ;    {\displaystyle \left(\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }a_{n}n^{-s}\right)\left(\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }b_{n}n^{-s}\right)=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }\left(\sum _{k\ell =n}a_{k}b_{\ell }\right)n^{-s};}    hence the coefficients of the product of two Dirichlet series are the multiplicative convolutions of the original coefficients.
Furthermore, techniques such as partial summation and Tauberian theorems can be used to get information about the coefficients from analytic information about the Dirichlet series.
Thus a common method for estimating a multiplicative function is to express it as a Dirichlet series (or a product of simpler Dirichlet series using convolution identities), examine this series as a complex function and then convert this analytic information back into information about the original function.
Riemann zeta function   Main article: Riemann zeta function  Euler showed that the fundamental theorem of arithmetic implies (at least formally) the Euler product        ∑   n  =  1    ∞      1   n   s      =   ∏   p    ∞      1   1  −   p   −  s        for   s  >  1    {\displaystyle \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{n^{s}}}=\prod _{p}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{1-p^{-s}}}{\text{ for }}s>1}    where the product is taken over all prime numbers p .
Euler's proof of the infinity of prime numbers makes use of the divergence of the term at the left hand side for s = 1 (the so-called harmonic series ), a purely analytic result.
Euler was also the first to use analytical arguments for the purpose of studying properties of integers, specifically by constructing generating power series .
This was the beginning of analytic number theory.
Later, Riemann considered this function for complex values of s and showed that this function can be extended to a meromorphic function on the entire plane with a simple pole at s = 1.
This function is now known as the Riemann Zeta function and is denoted by ζ ( s ).
There is a plethora of literature on this function and the function is a special case of the more general Dirichlet L-functions .
Analytic number theorists are often interested in the error of approximations such as the prime number theorem.
In this case, the error is smaller than x /log x .
Riemann's formula for π( x ) shows that the error term in this approximation can be expressed in terms of the zeros of the zeta function.
In his 1859 paper , Riemann conjectured that all the "non-trivial" zeros of ζ lie on the line     ℜ  (  s  )  =  1   /   2    {\displaystyle \Re (s)=1/2}   but never provided a proof of this statement.
This famous and long-standing conjecture is known as the Riemann Hypothesis and has many deep implications in number theory; in fact, many important theorems have been proved under the assumption that the hypothesis is true.
For example, under the assumption of the Riemann Hypothesis, the error term in the prime number theorem is     O  (   x   1   /   2  +  ε    )    {\displaystyle O(x^{1/2+\varepsilon })}   .
In the early 20th century G.
H.
Hardy and Littlewood proved many results about the zeta function in an attempt to prove the Riemann Hypothesis.
In fact, in 1914,
Hardy proved that there were infinitely many zeros of the zeta function on the critical line      ℜ  (  z  )  =  1   /   2.
{\displaystyle \Re (z)=1/2.}
This led to several theorems describing the density of the zeros on the critical line.
Branch of statistics  Not to be confused with Mathematics and statistics , Mathematics , or Statistics .
Illustration of linear regression on a data set.
Regression analysis is an important part of mathematical statistics.
Statistics  Outline  Statisticians  Glossary  Notation  Journals  Lists of topics  Articles  Category   Mathematics portal  v t e  Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Mathematical statistics is the application of probability theory , a branch of mathematics , to statistics , as opposed to techniques for collecting statistical data.
Specific mathematical techniques which are used for this include mathematical analysis , linear algebra , stochastic analysis , differential equations , and measure theory .
Introduction   Statistical data collection is concerned with the planning of studies, especially with the design of randomized experiments and with the planning of surveys using random sampling .
The initial analysis of the data often follows the study protocol specified prior to the study being conducted.
The data from a study can also be analyzed to consider secondary hypotheses inspired by the initial results, or to suggest new studies.
A secondary analysis of the data from a planned study uses tools from data analysis , and the process of doing this is mathematical statistics.
Data analysis is divided into:  descriptive statistics – the part of statistics that describes data, i.e.
summarises the data and their typical properties.
inferential statistics – the part of statistics that draws conclusions from data (using some model for the data): For example, inferential statistics involves selecting a model for the data, checking whether the data fulfill the conditions of a particular model, and with quantifying the involved uncertainty (e.g.
using confidence intervals ).
While the tools of data analysis work best on data from randomized studies, they are also applied to other kinds of data.
For example, from natural experiments and observational studies , in which case the inference is dependent on the model chosen by the statistician, and so subjective.
Topics   The following are some of the important topics in mathematical statistics:     Probability distributions   Main article: Probability distribution  A probability distribution is a function that assigns a probability to each measurable subset of the possible outcomes of a random experiment , survey , or procedure of statistical inference .
Examples are found in experiments whose sample space is non-numerical, where the distribution would be a categorical distribution ; experiments whose sample space is encoded by discrete random variables , where the distribution can be specified by a probability mass function ; and experiments with sample spaces encoded by continuous random variables, where the distribution can be specified by a probability density function .
More complex experiments, such as those involving stochastic processes defined in continuous time , may demand the use of more general probability measures .
A probability distribution can either be univariate or multivariate .
A univariate distribution gives the probabilities of a single random variable taking on various alternative values; a multivariate distribution (a joint probability distribution ) gives the probabilities of a random vector —a set of two or more random variables—taking on various combinations of values.
Important and commonly encountered univariate probability distributions include the binomial distribution , the hypergeometric distribution , and the normal distribution .
The multivariate normal distribution is a commonly encountered multivariate distribution.
Special distributions   Normal distribution ,  the most common continuous distribution  Bernoulli distribution , for the outcome of a single Bernoulli trial (e.g.
success/failure, yes/no)  Binomial distribution , for the number of "positive occurrences" (e.g.
successes, yes votes, etc.)
given a fixed total number of independent occurrences  Negative binomial distribution , for binomial-type observations but where the quantity of interest is the number of failures before a given number of successes occurs  Geometric distribution , for binomial-type observations but where the quantity of interest is the number of failures before the first success; a special case of the negative binomial distribution, where the number of successes is one.
Discrete uniform distribution , for a finite set of values (e.g.
the outcome of a fair die)  Continuous uniform distribution , for continuously distributed values  Poisson distribution , for the number of occurrences of a Poisson-type event in a given period of time  Exponential distribution , for the time before the next Poisson-type event occurs  Gamma distribution , for the time before the next k Poisson-type events occur  Chi-squared distribution , the distribution of a sum of squared standard normal variables; useful e.g.
for inference regarding the sample variance of normally distributed samples (see chi-squared test )  Student's t distribution , the distribution of the ratio of a standard normal variable and the square root of a scaled chi squared variable; useful for inference regarding the mean of normally distributed samples with unknown variance (see Student's t-test )  Beta distribution , for a single probability (real number between 0 and 1); conjugate to the Bernoulli distribution and binomial distribution  Statistical inference   Main article: Statistical inference  Statistical inference is the process of drawing conclusions from data that are subject to random variation, for example, observational errors or sampling variation.
Initial requirements of such a system of procedures for inference and induction are that the system should produce reasonable answers when applied to well-defined situations and that it should be general enough to be applied across a range of situations.
Inferential statistics are used to test hypotheses and make estimations using sample data.
Whereas descriptive statistics describe a sample, inferential statistics infer predictions about a larger population that the sample represents.
The outcome of statistical inference may be an answer to the question "what should be done next?
", where this might be a decision about making further experiments or surveys, or about drawing a conclusion before implementing some organizational or governmental policy.
For the most part, statistical inference makes propositions about populations, using data drawn from the population of interest via some form of random sampling.
More generally, data about a random process is obtained from its observed behavior during a finite period of time.
Given a parameter or hypothesis about which one wishes to make inference, statistical inference most often uses:  a statistical model of the random process that is supposed to generate the data, which is known when randomization has been used, and  a particular realization of the random process; i.e., a set of data.
Regression   Main article: Regression analysis  In statistics , regression analysis is a statistical process for estimating the relationships among variables.
It includes many ways for modeling and analyzing several variables, when the focus is on the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables .
More specifically, regression analysis helps one understand how the typical value of the dependent variable (or 'criterion variable') changes when any one of the independent variables is varied, while the other independent variables are held fixed.
Most commonly, regression analysis estimates the conditional expectation of the dependent variable given the independent variables – that is, the average value of the dependent variable when the independent variables are fixed.
Less commonly, the focus is on a quantile , or other location parameter of the conditional distribution of the dependent variable given the independent variables.
In all cases, the estimation target is a function of the independent variables called the regression function .
In regression analysis, it is also of interest to characterize the variation of the dependent variable around the regression function which can be described by a probability distribution .
Many techniques for carrying out regression analysis have been developed.
Familiar methods, such as linear regression , are parametric , in that the regression function is defined in terms of a finite number of unknown parameters that are estimated from the data (e.g.
using ordinary least squares ).
Nonparametric regression refers to techniques that allow the regression function to lie in a specified set of functions , which may be infinite-dimensional .
Nonparametric statistics   Main article: Nonparametric statistics  Nonparametric statistics are values calculated from data in a way that is not based on parameterized families of probability distributions .
They include both descriptive and inferential statistics.
The typical parameters are the mean, variance, etc.
Unlike parametric statistics , nonparametric statistics make no assumptions about the probability distributions of the variables being assessed.
Non-parametric methods are widely used for studying populations that take on a ranked order (such as movie reviews receiving one to four stars).
The use of non-parametric methods may be necessary when data have a ranking but no clear numerical interpretation, such as when assessing preferences .
In terms of levels of measurement , non-parametric methods result in "ordinal" data.
As non-parametric methods make fewer assumptions, their applicability is much wider than the corresponding parametric methods.
In particular, they may be applied in situations where less is known about the application in question.
Also, due to the reliance on fewer assumptions, non-parametric methods are more robust .
One drawback of non-parametric methods is that since they do not rely on assumptions, they are generally less powerful than their parametric counterparts.
Low power non-parametric tests are problematic because a common use of these methods is for when a sample has a low sample size.
Many parametric methods are proven to be the most powerful tests through methods such as the Neyman–Pearson lemma and the Likelihood-ratio test .
Another justification for the use of non-parametric methods is simplicity.
In certain cases, even when the use of parametric methods is justified, non-parametric methods may be easier to use.
Due both to this simplicity and to their greater robustness, non-parametric methods are seen by some statisticians as leaving less room for improper use and misunderstanding.
Statistics, mathematics, and mathematical statistics   Mathematical statistics is a key subset of the discipline of statistics .
Statistical theorists study and improve statistical procedures with mathematics, and statistical research often raises mathematical questions.
Mathematicians and statisticians like Gauss , Laplace , and C.
S.
Peirce used decision theory with probability distributions and loss functions (or utility functions ).
The decision-theoretic approach to statistical inference was reinvigorated by Abraham Wald and his successors,        and makes extensive use of scientific computing , analysis , and optimization ; for the design of experiments , statisticians use algebra and combinatorics .
But while statistical practice often relies on probability and decision theory , their application can be controversial   Reasoning for mathematical statements    P.
Oxy.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Mathematical proof at least partially generated by computer  A computer-assisted proof is a mathematical proof that has been at least partially generated by computer .
Most computer-aided proofs to date have been implementations of large proofs-by-exhaustion of a mathematical theorem .
The idea is to use a computer program to perform lengthy computations, and to provide a proof that the result of these computations implies the given theorem.
In 1976, the four color theorem was the first major theorem to be verified using a computer program .
Attempts have also been made in the area of artificial intelligence research to create smaller, explicit, new proofs of mathematical theorems from the bottom up using automated reasoning techniques such as heuristic search.
Such automated theorem provers have proved a number of new results and found new proofs for known theorems.
Additionally, interactive proof assistants allow mathematicians to develop human-readable proofs which are nonetheless formally verified for correctness.
Since these proofs are generally human-surveyable (albeit with difficulty, as with the proof of the Robbins conjecture ) they do not share the controversial implications of computer-aided proofs-by-exhaustion.
Methods   One method for using computers in mathematical proofs is by means of so-called validated numerics or rigorous numerics.
This means computing numerically yet with mathematical rigour.
One uses set-valued arithmetic and inclusion principle  in order to ensure that the set-valued output of a numerical program encloses the solution of the original mathematical problem.
This is done by controlling, enclosing and propagating round-off and truncation errors using for example interval arithmetic .
More precisely, one reduces the computation to a sequence of elementary operations, say     (  +  ,  −  ,  ×  ,   /   )    {\displaystyle (+,-,\times ,/)}   .
In a computer, the result of each elementary operation is rounded off by the computer precision.
However, one can construct an interval provided by upper and lower bounds on the result of an elementary operation.
Then one proceeds by replacing numbers with intervals and  performing  elementary operations between such intervals of representable numbers.
Philosophical objections   Main article: Non-surveyable proof  This section needs additional citations for verification .
( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Computer-assisted proofs are the subject of some controversy in the mathematical world, with Thomas Tymoczko first to articulate objections.
Those who adhere to Tymoczko's arguments believe that lengthy computer-assisted proofs are not, in some sense, 'real' mathematical proofs because they involve so many logical steps that they are not practically verifiable by human beings, and that mathematicians are effectively being asked to replace logical deduction from assumed axioms with trust in an empirical computational process, which is potentially affected by errors in the computer program, as well as defects in the runtime environment and hardware.
Other mathematicians believe that lengthy computer-assisted proofs should be regarded as calculations , rather than proofs : the proof algorithm itself should be proved valid, so that its use can then be regarded as a mere "verification".
Arguments that computer-assisted proofs are subject to errors in their source programs, compilers, and hardware can be resolved by providing a formal proof of correctness for the computer program (an approach which was successfully applied to the four-color theorem in 2005) as well as replicating the result using different programming languages, different compilers, and different computer hardware.
Another possible way of verifying computer-aided proofs is to generate their reasoning steps in a machine-readable form, and then use a proof checker program to demonstrate their correctness.
Since validating a given proof is much easier than finding a proof, the checker program is simpler than the original assistant program, and it is correspondingly easier to gain confidence into its correctness.
However, this approach of using a computer program to prove the output of another program correct does not appeal to computer proof skeptics, who see it as adding another layer of complexity without addressing the perceived need for human understanding.
Another argument against computer-aided proofs is that they lack mathematical elegance —that they provide no insights or new and useful concepts.
In fact, this is an argument that could be advanced against any lengthy proof by exhaustion.
An additional philosophical issue raised by computer-aided proofs is whether they make mathematics into a quasi-empirical science , where the scientific method becomes more important than the application of pure reason in the area of abstract mathematical concepts.
This directly relates to the argument within mathematics as to whether mathematics is based on ideas, or "merely" an exercise in formal symbol manipulation.
It also raises the question whether, if according to the Platonist view, all possible mathematical objects in some sense "already exist", whether computer-aided mathematics is an observational science like astronomy, rather than an experimental one like physics or chemistry.
This controversy within mathematics is occurring at the same time as questions are being asked in the physics community about whether twenty-first century theoretical physics is becoming too mathematical, and leaving behind its experimental roots.
The emerging field of experimental mathematics is confronting this debate head-on by focusing on numerical experiments as its main tool for mathematical exploration.
Applications   Theorems proved with the help of computer programs   See also: Proof assistant § Notable formalized proofs  Inclusion in this list does not imply that a formal computer-checked proof exists, but rather, that a computer program has been involved in some way.
See the main articles for details.
Four color theorem , 1976   Mitchell Feigenbaum 's universality conjecture in non-linear dynamics.
Proven by O.
E.
Lanford using rigorous computer arithmetic, 1982  Connect Four , 1988 – a solved game  Non-existence of a finite projective plane of order 10, 1989  Double bubble conjecture , 1995   Robbins conjecture , 1996  Kepler conjecture , 1998 – the problem of optimal sphere packing in a box  Lorenz attractor , 2002 – 14th of Smale's problems proved by Warwick Tucker using interval arithmetic  17-point case of the Happy Ending problem , 2006  Kouril    (between 2006 and 2016) computed several van der Waerden numbers using FPGA -based SAT-solver .
NP-hardness of minimum-weight triangulation , 2008  Ahmed      (between 2009 and 2014) computed several van der Waerden numbers using DPLL algorithm -based stand-alone and distributed SAT-solvers .
Ahmed first used cluster-distributed SAT-solvers to prove w(2; 3, 17) = 279 and w(2; 3, 18) = 312 in 2010.
Optimal solutions for Rubik's Cube can be obtained in at most 20 face moves, 2010   Minimum number of clues for a solvable Sudoku puzzle is 17, 2012  In 2014 a special case of the Erdős discrepancy problem was solved using a SAT-solver .
The full conjecture was later solved by Terence Tao without computer assistance.
Boolean Pythagorean triples problem solved using 200 terabytes of data in May 2016.
Applications to the Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser theory    Kazhdan's property (T) for the automorphism group of a free group of rank at least five  Schur number five , the proof that S(5) = 161 was announced in 2017 by Marijn Heule and took up 2 petabytes of space    Keller's conjecture in dimension 7 the only remaining case in 2020 with a 200 gigabyte proof    The packing chromatic number of the infinite square grid is 15, by Subercaseaux and Heule in 2023   (See also: Hadwiger–Nelson problem for the chromatic number of the plane)  Page notice  You are not logged in.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Geometric axiom  If the sum of the interior angles α and β is less than 180°, the two straight lines, produced indefinitely, meet on that side.
In geometry , the parallel postulate , also called Euclid 's fifth postulate because it is the fifth postulate in Euclid's Elements , is a distinctive axiom in Euclidean geometry .
It states that, in two-dimensional geometry:   If a line segment intersects two straight lines forming two interior angles on the same side that are less than two right angles , then the two lines, if extended indefinitely, meet on that side on which the angles sum to less than two right angles.
This postulate does not specifically talk about parallel lines;  it is only a postulate related to parallelism.
Euclid gave the definition of parallel lines in Book I, Definition 23  just before the five postulates.
Euclidean geometry is the study of geometry that satisfies all of Euclid's axioms, including the parallel postulate.
The postulate was long considered to be obvious or inevitable, but proofs were elusive.
Eventually, it was discovered that inverting the postulate gave valid, albeit different geometries.
A geometry where the parallel postulate does not hold is known as a non-Euclidean geometry .
Geometry that is independent of Euclid's fifth postulate (i.e., only assumes the modern equivalent of the first four postulates) is known as absolute geometry (or sometimes "neutral geometry").
Equivalent properties   Probably the best-known equivalent of Euclid's parallel postulate, contingent on his other postulates, is Playfair's axiom , named after the Scottish mathematician  John Playfair , which states:   In a plane, given a line and a point not on it, at most one line parallel to the given line can be drawn through the point.
This axiom by itself is not logically equivalent to the Euclidean parallel postulate since there are geometries in which one is true and the other is not.
However, in the presence of the remaining axioms which give Euclidean geometry, each of these can be used to prove the other, so they are equivalent in the context of absolute geometry .
Many other statements equivalent to the parallel postulate have been suggested, some of them appearing at first to be unrelated to parallelism, and some seeming so self-evident that they were unconsciously assumed by people who claimed to have proven the parallel postulate from Euclid's other postulates.
These equivalent statements include:  There is at most one line that can be drawn parallel to another given one through an external point.
( Playfair's axiom )  The sum of the angles in every triangle is 180° ( triangle postulate ).
There exists a triangle whose angles add up to 180°.
The sum of the angles is the same for every triangle.
There exists a pair of similar , but not congruent , triangles.
Every triangle can be circumscribed .
If three angles of a quadrilateral are right angles , then the fourth angle is also a right angle.
There exists a quadrilateral in which all angles are right angles, that is, a rectangle .
There exists a pair of straight lines that are at constant distance from each other.
Two lines that are parallel to the same line are also parallel to each other.
In a right-angled triangle , the square of the hypotenuse equals the sum of the squares of the other two sides ( Pythagoras' theorem ).
The law of cosines , a generalization of Pythagoras' theorem.
There is no upper limit to the area of a triangle.
( Wallis axiom )   The summit angles of the Saccheri quadrilateral are 90°.
If a line intersects one of two parallel lines, both of which are coplanar with the original line, then it also intersects the other.
( Proclus ' axiom)   However, the alternatives which employ the word "parallel" cease appearing so simple when one is obliged to explain which of the four common definitions of "parallel" is meant – constant separation, never meeting, same angles where crossed by some third line, or same angles where crossed by any third line – since the equivalence of these four is itself one of the unconsciously obvious assumptions equivalent to Euclid's fifth postulate.
In the list above, it is always taken to refer to non-intersecting lines.
For example, if the word "parallel" in Playfair's axiom is taken to mean 'constant separation' or 'same angles where crossed by any third line', then it is no longer equivalent to Euclid's fifth postulate, and is provable from the first four (the axiom says 'There is at most one line...', which is consistent with there being no such lines).
However, if the definition is taken so that parallel lines are lines that do not intersect, or that have some line intersecting them in the same angles, Playfair's axiom is contextually equivalent to Euclid's fifth postulate and is thus logically independent of the first four postulates.
Note that the latter two definitions are not equivalent, because in hyperbolic geometry the second definition holds only for ultraparallel lines.
History   From the beginning, the postulate came under attack as being provable, and therefore not a postulate, and for more than two thousand years, many attempts were made to prove (derive) the parallel postulate using Euclid's first four postulates.
The main reason that such a proof was so highly sought after was that, unlike the first four postulates, the parallel postulate is not self-evident.
If the order in which the postulates were listed in the Elements is significant, it indicates that Euclid included this postulate only when he realised he could not prove it or proceed without it.
Many attempts were made to prove the fifth postulate from the other four, many of them being accepted as proofs for long periods until the mistake was found.
Invariably the mistake was assuming some 'obvious' property which turned out to be equivalent to the fifth postulate ( Playfair's axiom ).
Although known from the time of Proclus, this became known as Playfair's Axiom after John Playfair wrote a famous commentary on Euclid in 1795 in which he proposed replacing Euclid's fifth postulate by his own axiom.
Today, over two thousand two hundred years later, Euclid's fifth postulate remains a postulate.
Proclus (410–485) wrote a commentary on The Elements where he comments on attempted proofs to deduce the fifth postulate from the other four; in particular, he notes that Ptolemy had produced a false 'proof'.
Proclus then goes on to give a false proof of his own.
However, he did give a postulate which is equivalent to the fifth postulate.
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) (965–1039), an Arab mathematician , made an attempt at proving the parallel postulate using a proof by contradiction ,  in the course of which he introduced the concept of motion and transformation into geometry.
He formulated the Lambert quadrilateral , which Boris Abramovich Rozenfeld names the "Ibn al-Haytham–Lambert quadrilateral",  and his attempted proof contains elements similar to those found in Lambert quadrilaterals and Playfair's axiom .
The Persian mathematician, astronomer, philosopher, and poet Omar Khayyám (1050–1123), attempted to prove the fifth postulate from another explicitly given postulate (based on the fourth of the five principles due to the Philosopher ( Aristotle ), namely, "Two convergent straight lines intersect and it is impossible for two convergent straight lines to diverge in the direction in which they converge."
He derived some of the earlier results belonging to elliptical geometry and hyperbolic geometry , though his postulate excluded the latter possibility.
The Saccheri quadrilateral was also first considered by Omar Khayyám in the late 11th century in Book I of Explanations of the Difficulties in the Postulates of Euclid .
Unlike many commentators on Euclid before and after him (including Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri ), Khayyám was not trying to prove the parallel postulate as such but to derive it from his equivalent postulate.
He recognized that three possibilities arose from omitting Euclid's fifth postulate; if two perpendiculars to one line cross another line, judicious choice of the last can make the internal angles where it meets the two perpendiculars equal (it is then parallel to the first line).
If those equal internal angles are right angles, we get Euclid's fifth postulate, otherwise, they must be either acute or obtuse.
He showed that the acute and obtuse cases led to contradictions using his postulate, but his postulate is now known to be equivalent to the fifth postulate.
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201–1274), in his Al-risala al-shafiya'an al-shakk fi'l-khutut al-mutawaziya ( Discussion Which Removes Doubt about Parallel Lines ) (1250), wrote detailed critiques of the parallel postulate and on Khayyám's attempted proof a century earlier.
Nasir al-Din attempted to derive a proof by contradiction of the parallel postulate.
He also considered the cases of what are now known as elliptical and hyperbolic geometry, though he ruled out both of them.
Euclidean, elliptical and hyperbolic geometry.
The Parallel Postulate is satisfied only for models of Euclidean geometry.
Nasir al-Din's son, Sadr al-Din (sometimes known as " Pseudo-Tusi "), wrote a book on the subject in 1298, based on his father's later thoughts, which presented one of the earliest arguments for a non-Euclidean hypothesis equivalent to the parallel postulate.
His work was published in Rome in 1594 and was studied by European geometers.
This work marked the starting point for Saccheri's work on the subject  which opened with a criticism of Sadr al-Din's work and the work of Wallis.
Giordano Vitale (1633–1711), in his book Euclide restituo (1680, 1686), used the Khayyam-Saccheri quadrilateral to prove that if three points are equidistant on the base AB and the summit CD, then AB and CD are everywhere equidistant.
Girolamo Saccheri (1667–1733) pursued the same line of reasoning more thoroughly, correctly obtaining absurdity from the obtuse case (proceeding, like Euclid, from the implicit assumption that lines can be extended indefinitely and have infinite length), but failing to refute the acute case (although he managed to wrongly persuade himself that he had).
He worked with a figure that today we call a Lambert quadrilateral , a quadrilateral with three right angles (can be considered half of a Saccheri quadrilateral).
He quickly eliminated the possibility that the fourth angle is obtuse, as had Saccheri and Khayyám, and then proceeded to prove many theorems under the assumption of an acute angle.
Where Khayyám and Saccheri had attempted to prove Euclid's fifth by disproving the only possible alternatives, the nineteenth century finally saw mathematicians exploring those alternatives and discovering the logically consistent geometries that result.
In 1829, Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky published an account of acute geometry in an obscure Russian journal (later re-published in 1840 in German).
In 1831, János Bolyai included, in a book by his father, an appendix describing acute geometry, which, doubtlessly, he had developed independently of Lobachevsky.
Carl Friedrich Gauss had also studied the problem, but he did not publish any of his results.
Upon hearing of Bolyai's results in a letter from Bolyai's father, Farkas Bolyai , Gauss stated:  If I commenced by saying that I am unable to praise this work, you would certainly be surprised for a moment.
But I cannot say otherwise.
To praise it would be to praise myself.
Indeed the whole contents of the work, the path taken by your son, the results to which he is led, coincide almost entirely with my meditations, which have occupied my mind partly for the last thirty or thirty-five years.
The resulting geometries were later developed by Lobachevsky , Riemann and Poincaré into hyperbolic geometry (the acute case) and elliptic geometry (the obtuse case).
The independence of the parallel postulate from Euclid's other axioms was finally demonstrated by Eugenio Beltrami in 1868.
Converse of Euclid's parallel postulate   The converse of the parallel postulate: If the sum of the two interior angles equals 180°, then the lines are parallel and will never intersect.
Euclid did not postulate the converse of his fifth postulate, which is one way to distinguish Euclidean geometry from elliptic geometry .
The Elements contains the proof of an equivalent statement (Book I, Proposition 27): If a straight line falling on two straight lines make the alternate angles equal to one another, the straight lines will be parallel to one another.
As De Morgan  pointed out, this is logically equivalent to (Book I, Proposition 16).
These results do not depend upon the fifth postulate, but they do require the second postulate  which is violated in elliptic geometry.
Criticism   Attempts to logically prove the parallel postulate, rather than the eighth axiom,  were criticized by Arthur Schopenhauer in The World as Will and Idea .
However, the argument used by Schopenhauer was that the postulate is evident by perception, not that it was not a logical consequence of the other axioms.
Decomposition of the parallel postulate   The parallel postulate is equivalent, as shown in,  to the conjunction of the Lotschnittaxiom and of Aristotle's axiom .
The former states that the perpendiculars to the sides of a right angle intersect, while the latter states that there is no upper bound for the lengths of the distances from the leg of an angle to the other leg.
As shown in,  the parallel postulate is equivalent to the conjunction of the following incidence-geometric forms of the Lotschnittaxiom and of Aristotle's axiom : Given three parallel lines, there is a line that intersects all three of them.
Given a line a and two distinct intersecting lines m and n , each different from a , there exists a line g which intersects a and m , but not n .
As shown in,  the splitting of the parallel postulate into the conjunction of these incidence-geometric axioms is possible only in the presence of absolute geometry .
Mathematical model of the physical space  "Plane geometry" redirects here.
For other uses, see Plane geometry (disambiguation) .
Detail from Raphael 's The School of Athens featuring a Greek mathematician – perhaps representing Euclid or Archimedes – using a compass to draw a geometric construction.
Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane  Outline History ( Timeline )  Branches  Euclidean  Non-Euclidean  Elliptic  Spherical  Hyperbolic  Non-Archimedean geometry  Projective  Affine  Synthetic  Analytic  Algebraic  Arithmetic  Diophantine  Differential  Riemannian  Symplectic  Discrete differential  Complex  Finite  Discrete/Combinatorial  Digital  Convex  Computational  Fractal  Incidence  Noncommutative geometry  Noncommutative algebraic geometry   Concepts Features Dimension  Straightedge and compass constructions  Angle  Curve  Diagonal  Orthogonality ( Perpendicular )  Parallel  Vertex  Congruence  Similarity  Symmetry   Zero-dimensional  Point   One-dimensional  Line  segment  ray  Length   Two-dimensional  Plane  Area  Polygon   Triangle  Altitude  Hypotenuse  Pythagorean theorem   Parallelogram  Square  Rectangle  Rhombus  Rhomboid   Quadrilateral  Trapezoid  Kite   Circle  Diameter  Circumference  Area    Three-dimensional  Volume  Cube  cuboid  Cylinder  Dodecahedron  Icosahedron  Octahedron  Pyramid  Platonic Solid  Sphere  Tetrahedron   Four - / other-dimensional  Tesseract  Hypersphere   Geometers  by name  Aida  Aryabhata  Ahmes  Alhazen  Apollonius  Archimedes  Atiyah  Baudhayana  Bolyai  Brahmagupta  Cartan  Coxeter  Descartes  Euclid  Euler  Gauss  Gromov  Hilbert  Huygens  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Kātyāyana  Khayyám  Klein  Lobachevsky  Manava  Minkowski  Minggatu  Pascal  Pythagoras  Parameshvara  Poincaré  Riemann  Sakabe  Sijzi  al-Tusi  Veblen  Virasena  Yang Hui  al-Yasamin  Zhang  List of geometers   by period  BCE  Ahmes  Baudhayana  Manava  Pythagoras  Euclid  Archimedes  Apollonius  1–1400s  Zhang  Kātyāyana  Aryabhata  Brahmagupta  Virasena  Alhazen  Sijzi  Khayyám  al-Yasamin  al-Tusi  Yang Hui  Parameshvara  1400s–1700s  Jyeṣṭhadeva  Descartes  Pascal  Huygens  Minggatu  Euler  Sakabe  Aida  1700s–1900s  Gauss  Lobachevsky  Bolyai  Riemann  Klein  Poincaré  Hilbert  Minkowski  Cartan  Veblen  Coxeter  Present day  Atiyah  Gromov   v t e  Euclidean geometry is a mathematical system attributed to ancient Greek mathematician  Euclid , which he described in his textbook on geometry , Elements .
Euclid's approach consists in assuming a small set of intuitively appealing axioms (postulates) and deducing many other propositions ( theorems ) from these.
Although many of Euclid's results had been stated earlier,  Euclid was the first to organize these propositions into a logical system in which each result is proved from axioms and previously proved theorems.
The Elements begins with plane geometry , still taught in secondary school (high school) as the first axiomatic system and the first examples of mathematical proofs .
It goes on to the solid geometry of three dimensions .
Much of the Elements states results of what are now called algebra and number theory , explained in geometrical language.
For more than two thousand years, the adjective "Euclidean" was unnecessary because
Euclid's axioms seemed so intuitively obvious (with the possible exception of the parallel postulate ) that theorems proved from them were deemed absolutely true, and thus no other sorts of geometry were possible.
Today, however, many other self-consistent  non-Euclidean geometries are known, the first ones having been discovered in the early 19th century.
An implication of Albert Einstein 's theory of general relativity is that physical space itself is not Euclidean, and Euclidean space is a good approximation for it only over short distances (relative to the strength of the gravitational field ).
Euclidean geometry is an example of synthetic geometry , in that it proceeds logically from axioms describing basic properties of geometric objects such as points and lines, to propositions about those objects.
This is in contrast to analytic geometry , introduced almost 2,000 years later by René Descartes , which uses coordinates to express geometric properties by means of algebraic formulas .
The Elements   Main article: Euclid's Elements  The Elements is mainly a systematization of earlier knowledge of geometry.
Its improvement over earlier treatments was rapidly recognized, with the result that there was little interest in preserving the earlier ones, and they are now nearly all lost.
There are 13 books in the Elements : Books I–IV and VI discuss plane geometry.
Many results about plane figures are proved, for example, "In any triangle, two angles taken together in any manner are less than two right angles."
(Book I proposition 17) and the Pythagorean theorem "In right-angled triangles the square on the side subtending the right angle is equal to the squares on the sides containing the right angle."
(Book I, proposition 47) Books V and VII–X deal with number theory , with numbers treated geometrically as lengths of line segments or areas of surface regions.
Notions such as prime numbers and rational and irrational numbers are introduced.
It is proved that there are infinitely many prime numbers.
Books XI–XIII concern solid geometry .
A typical result is the 1:3 ratio between the volume of a cone and a cylinder with the same height and base.
The platonic solids are constructed.
Axioms   The parallel postulate (Postulate 5): If two lines intersect a third in such a way that the sum of the inner angles on one side is less than two right angles, then the two lines inevitably must intersect each other on that side if extended far enough.
Euclidean geometry is an axiomatic system , in which all theorems ("true statements") are derived from a small number of simple axioms.
Until the advent of non-Euclidean geometry , these axioms were considered to be obviously true in the physical world, so that all the theorems would be equally true.
However, Euclid's reasoning from assumptions to conclusions remains valid independently from the physical reality.
Near the beginning of the first book of the Elements , Euclid gives five postulates (axioms) for plane geometry, stated in terms of constructions (as translated by Thomas Heath):    Let the following be postulated:  To draw a straight line from any point to any point.
To produce (extend) a finite straight line continuously in a straight line.
To describe a circle with any centre and distance (radius).
: That, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that side on which the angles are less than two right angles.
Although Euclid explicitly only asserts the existence of the constructed objects, in his reasoning he also implicitly assumes them to be unique.
The Elements also include the following five "common notions":  Things that are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another (the transitive property of a Euclidean relation ).
If equals are added to equals, then the wholes are equal (Addition property of equality).
If equals are subtracted from equals, then the differences are equal (subtraction property of equality).
Things that coincide with one another are equal to one another (reflexive property).
Modern scholars agree that Euclid's postulates do not provide the complete logical foundation that Euclid required for his presentation.
Modern treatments use more extensive and complete sets of axioms.
Parallel postulate   Main article: Parallel postulate  To the ancients, the parallel postulate seemed less obvious than the others.
They aspired to create a system of absolutely certain propositions, and to them, it seemed as if the parallel line postulate required proof from simpler statements.
It is now known that such a proof is impossible since one can construct consistent systems of geometry (obeying the other axioms) in which the parallel postulate is true, and others in which it is false.
Euclid himself seems to have considered it as being qualitatively different from the others, as evidenced by the organization of the Elements : his first 28 propositions are those that can be proved without it.
Many alternative axioms can be formulated which are logically equivalent to the parallel postulate (in the context of the other axioms).
For example, Playfair's axiom states:  In a plane , through a point not on a given straight line, at most one line can be drawn that never meets the given line.
The "at most" clause is all that is needed since it can be proved from the remaining axioms that at least one parallel line exists.
A proof from Euclid's Elements that, given a line segment, one may construct an equilateral triangle that includes the segment as one of its sides: an equilateral triangle ΑΒΓ is made by drawing circles Δ and Ε centered on the points Α and Β, and taking one intersection of the circles as the third vertex of the triangle.
Methods of proof   Euclidean Geometry is constructive .
Postulates 1, 2, 3, and 5 assert the existence and uniqueness of certain geometric figures, and these assertions are of a constructive nature: that is, we are not only told that certain things exist, but are also given methods for creating them with no more than a compass and an unmarked straightedge .
In this sense, Euclidean geometry is more concrete than many modern axiomatic systems such as set theory , which often assert the existence of objects without saying how to construct them, or even assert the existence of objects that cannot be constructed within the theory.
Strictly speaking, the lines on paper are models of the objects defined within the formal system, rather than instances of those objects.
For example, a Euclidean straight line has no width, but any real drawn line will have.
Though nearly all modern mathematicians consider nonconstructive methods just as sound as constructive ones, Euclid's constructive proofs often supplanted fallacious nonconstructive ones—e.g., some of the Pythagoreans' proofs that involved irrational numbers, which usually required a statement such as "Find the greatest common measure of ..."   Euclid often used proof by contradiction .
Euclidean geometry also allows the method of superposition, in which a figure is transferred to another point in space.
For example, proposition I.4, side–angle–side congruence of triangles, is proved by moving one of the two triangles so that one of its sides coincides with the other triangle's equal side, and then proving that the other sides coincide as well.
Some modern treatments add a sixth postulate, the rigidity of the triangle, which can be used as an alternative to superposition.
Notation and terminology   Naming of points and figures   Points are customarily named using capital letters of the alphabet.
Other figures, such as lines, triangles, or circles, are named by listing a sufficient number of points to pick them out unambiguously from the relevant figure, e.g., triangle ABC would typically be a triangle with vertices at points A, B, and C.
 Complementary and supplementary angles   Angles whose sum is a right angle are called complementary .
Complementary angles are formed when a ray shares the same vertex and is pointed in a direction that is in between the two original rays that form the right angle.
The number of rays in between the two original rays is infinite.
Angles whose sum is a straight angle are supplementary .
Supplementary angles are formed when a ray shares the same vertex and is pointed in a direction that is in between the two original rays that form the straight angle (180 degree angle).
Modern versions of Euclid's notation   In modern terminology, angles would normally be measured in degrees or radians .
Modern school textbooks often define separate figures called lines (infinite), rays (semi-infinite), and line segments (of finite length).
Euclid, rather than discussing a ray as an object that extends to infinity in one direction, would normally use locutions such as "if the line is extended to a sufficient length", although he occasionally referred to "infinite lines".
A "line" in Euclid could be either straight or curved, and he used the more specific term "straight line" when necessary.
Some important or well known results      The pons asinorum or bridge of asses theorem states that in an isosceles triangle, α = β and γ = δ.
The triangle angle sum theorem states that the sum of the three angles of any triangle, in this case angles α, β, and γ, will always equal 180 degrees.
The Pythagorean theorem states that the sum of the areas of the two squares on the legs ( a and b ) of a right triangle equals the area of the square on the hypotenuse ( c ).
Thales' theorem states that if AC is a diameter, then the angle at B is a right angle.
Pons asinorum   The pons asinorum ( bridge of asses ) states that in isosceles triangles the angles at the base equal one another, and, if the equal straight lines are produced further, then the angles under the base equal one another .
Its name may be attributed to its frequent role as the first real test in the Elements of the intelligence of the reader and as a bridge to the harder propositions that followed.
It might also be so named because of the geometrical figure's resemblance to a steep bridge that only a sure-footed donkey could cross.
Congruence of triangles   Congruence of triangles is determined by specifying two sides and the angle between them (SAS), two angles and the side between them (ASA) or two angles and a corresponding adjacent side (AAS).
Specifying two sides and an adjacent angle (SSA), however, can yield two distinct possible triangles unless the angle specified is a right angle.
Triangles are congruent if they have all three sides equal (SSS), two sides and the angle between them equal (SAS), or two angles and a side equal (ASA) (Book I, propositions 4, 8, and 26).
Triangles with three equal angles (AAA) are similar, but not necessarily congruent.
Also, triangles with two equal sides and an adjacent angle are not necessarily equal or congruent.
Triangle angle sum   The sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to a straight angle (180 degrees).
This causes an equilateral triangle to have three interior angles of 60 degrees.
Also, it causes every triangle to have at least two acute angles and up to one obtuse or right angle .
Pythagorean theorem   The celebrated Pythagorean theorem (book I, proposition 47) states that in any right triangle, the area of the square whose side is the hypotenuse (the side opposite the right angle) is equal to the sum of the areas of the squares whose sides are the two legs (the two sides that meet at a right angle).
Thales' theorem   Thales' theorem , named after Thales of Miletus states that if A, B, and C are points on a circle where the line AC is a diameter of the circle, then the angle ABC is a right angle.
Cantor supposed that Thales proved his theorem by means of Euclid Book I, Prop.
32 after the manner of Euclid Book III, Prop.
31.
Scaling of area and volume   In modern terminology, the area of a plane figure is proportional to the square of any of its linear dimensions,     A  ∝   L   2      {\displaystyle A\propto L^{2}}   , and the volume of a solid to the cube,     V  ∝   L   3      {\displaystyle V\propto L^{3}}   .
Euclid proved these results in various special cases such as the area of a circle  and the volume of a parallelepipedal solid.
Euclid determined some, but not all, of the relevant constants of proportionality.
E.g., it was his successor Archimedes who proved that a sphere has 2/3 the volume of the circumscribing cylinder.
System of measurement and arithmetic   Euclidean geometry has two fundamental types of measurements: angle and distance .
The angle scale is absolute, and Euclid uses the right angle as his basic unit, so that, for example, a 45- degree angle would be referred to as half of a right angle.
The distance scale is relative; one arbitrarily picks a line segment with a certain nonzero length as the unit, and other distances are expressed in relation to it.
Addition of distances is represented by a construction in which one line segment is copied onto the end of another line segment to extend its length, and similarly for subtraction.
Measurements of area and volume are derived from distances.
For example, a rectangle with a width of 3 and a length of 4 has an area that represents the product, 12.
Because this geometrical interpretation of multiplication was limited to three dimensions, there was no direct way of interpreting the product of four or more numbers, and Euclid avoided such products, although they are implied, for example in the proof of book IX, proposition 20.
An example of congruence.
The two figures on the left are congruent, while the third is similar to them.
The last figure is neither.
Congruences alter some properties, such as location and orientation, but leave others unchanged, like distance and angles .
The latter sort of properties are called invariants and studying them is the essence of geometry.
Euclid refers to a pair of lines, or a pair of planar or solid figures, as "equal" (ἴσος) if their lengths, areas, or volumes are equal respectively, and similarly for angles.
The stronger term " congruent " refers to the idea that an entire figure is the same size and shape as another figure.
Alternatively, two figures are congruent if one can be moved on top of the other so that it matches up with it exactly.
(Flipping it over is allowed.)
Thus, for example, a 2x6 rectangle and a 3x4 rectangle are equal but not congruent, and the letter R is congruent to its mirror image.
Figures that would be congruent except for their differing sizes are referred to as similar .
Corresponding angles in a pair of similar shapes are equal and corresponding sides are in proportion to each other.
Euclidean geometry in engineering   Design and Analysis   Stress Analysis : Stress Analysis - Euclidean geometry is pivotal in determining stress distribution in mechanical components, which is essential for ensuring structural integrity and durability .
Mechanical Stress  Gear Design : Gear - The design of gears, a crucial element in many mechanical systems , relies heavily on Euclidean geometry to ensure proper tooth shape and engagement for efficient power transmission .
Gear  Heat Exchanger Design : Heat exchanger - In thermal engineering , Euclidean geometry is used to design heat exchangers , where the geometric configuration greatly influences thermal efficiency .
See shell-and-tube heat exchangers and plate heat exchangers for more details.
U-Tube Shell and Tube Heat Exchanger  Lens Design : Lens - In optical engineering, Euclidean geometry is critical in the design of lenses, where precise geometric shapes determine the focusing properties.
Geometric optics analyzes the focusing of light by lenses and mirrors .
Types of Lenses  Dynamics   Vibration Analysis : Vibration - Euclidean geometry is essential in analyzing and understanding the vibrations in mechanical systems , aiding in the design of systems that can withstand or utilize these vibrations effectively.
Vibration - Oscillations  Wing Design : Aircraft Wing Design - The application of Euclidean geometry in aerodynamics is evident in aircraft  wing design , airfoils , and hydrofoils where geometric shape directly impacts lift and drag characteristics.
Airfoil Nomenclature  Satellite Orbits : Satellite Orbits - Euclidean geometry helps in calculating and predicting the orbits of satellites , essential for successful space missions and satellite operations.
Also see astrodynamics , celestial mechanics , and elliptic orbit .
Animation of Orbit by Eccentricity  CAD Systems   3D Modeling : In CAD (computer-aided design) systems, Euclidean geometry is fundamental for creating accurate 3D models of mechanical parts.
These models are crucial for visualizing and testing designs before manufacturing .
Design and Manufacturing : Much of CAM (computer-aided manufacturing) relies on Euclidean geometry.
The design geometry in CAD/CAM typically consists of shapes bounded by planes , cylinders , cones , tori , and other similar Euclidean forms.
Today, CAD/CAM is essential in the design of a wide range of products, from cars and airplanes to ships and smartphones .
Evolution of Drafting Practices : Historically, advanced Euclidean geometry, including theorems like Pascal's theorem and Brianchon's theorem , was integral to drafting practices.
However, with the advent of modern CAD systems, such in-depth knowledge of these theorems is less necessary in contemporary design and manufacturing processes.
See also: History of CAD software  3D CAD Model  Circuit Design   PCB Layouts : Printed Circuit Board (PCB) Design utilizes Euclidean geometry for the efficient placement and routing of components, ensuring functionality while optimizing space .
Efficient layout of electronic components on PCBs is critical for minimizing signal interference and optimizing circuit performance .
PCB of a DVD Player  Electromagnetic and Fluid Flow Fields   Antenna Design : Antenna Design - Euclidean geometry of antennas helps in designing antennas, where the spatial arrangement and dimensions directly affect antenna and array performance in transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves .
NASA Cassegrain , Extremely high gain ~70 dBi.
Field Theory : Complex Potential Flow - In the study of inviscid flow fields and electromagnetic fields , Euclidean geometry aids in visualizing and solving potential flow problems.
This is essential for understanding fluid velocity field and electromagnetic field interactions in three-dimensional space.
The relationship of which is characterized by an irrotational  solenoidal field or a conservative vector field .
Potential Flow Around a Source without Circulation  Controls   Control System Analysis : Control Systems - The application of Euclidean geometry in control theory helps in the analysis and design of control systems , particularly in understanding and optimizing system stability and response .
Basic feedback loop.
Calculation Tools : Jacobian - Euclidean geometry is integral in using Jacobian matrices for transformations and control systems in both mechanical and electrical engineering fields, providing insights into system behavior and properties.
The Jacobian serves as a linearized design matrix in statistical regression and curve fitting ; see non-linear least squares .
The Jacobian is also used in random matrices , moment , statistics , and diagnostics .
Other general applications   Because of Euclidean geometry's fundamental status in mathematics, it is impractical to give more than a representative sampling of applications here.
A surveyor uses a level     Sphere packing applies to a stack of oranges .
A parabolic mirror brings parallel rays of light to a focus.
As suggested by the etymology of the word, one of the earliest reasons for interest in and also one of the most common current uses of geometry is surveying .
In addition it has been used in the cognitive and computational approaches to visual perception of objects .
Certain practical results from Euclidean geometry (such as the right-angle property of the 3-4-5 triangle) were used long before they were proved formally.
The fundamental types of measurements in Euclidean geometry are distances and angles, both of which can be measured directly by a surveyor.
Historically, distances were often measured by chains, such as Gunter's chain , and angles using graduated circles and, later, the theodolite .
An application of Euclidean solid geometry is the determination of packing arrangements , such as the problem of finding the most efficient packing of spheres in n dimensions.
This problem has applications in error detection and correction .
Geometry is used in art and architecture.
The water tower consists of a cone, a cylinder, and a hemisphere.
Its volume can be calculated using solid geometry.
Geometry can be used to design origami.
Geometry is used extensively in architecture .
Geometry can be used to design origami .
Some classical construction problems of geometry are impossible using compass and straightedge , but can be solved using origami .
Later history   See also: History of geometry and Non-Euclidean geometry § History  Archimedes and Apollonius   A sphere has 2/3 the volume and surface area of its circumscribing cylinder.
A sphere and cylinder were placed on the tomb of Archimedes at his request.
Archimedes ( c.
287 BCE – c.
212 BCE ), a colorful figure about whom many historical anecdotes are recorded, is remembered along with Euclid as one of the greatest of ancient mathematicians.
Although the foundations of his work were put in place by Euclid, his work, unlike Euclid's, is believed to have been entirely original.
He proved equations for the volumes and areas of various figures in two and three dimensions, and enunciated the Archimedean property of finite numbers.
Apollonius of Perga ( c.
240 BCE – c.
190 BCE ) is mainly known for his investigation of conic sections.
René Descartes.
Portrait after Frans Hals , 1648.
17th century: Descartes   René Descartes (1596–1650) developed analytic geometry , an alternative method for formalizing geometry which focused on turning geometry into algebra.
In this approach, a point on a plane is represented by its Cartesian ( x , y ) coordinates, a line is represented by its equation, and so on.
In Euclid's original approach, the Pythagorean theorem follows from Euclid's axioms.
In the Cartesian approach, the axioms are the axioms of algebra, and the equation expressing the Pythagorean theorem is then a definition of one of the terms in Euclid's axioms, which are now considered theorems.
The equation       |   P  Q   |   =    (   p   x    −   q   x     )   2    +  (   p   y    −   q   y     )   2         {\displaystyle |PQ|={\sqrt {(p_{x}-q_{x})^{2}+(p_{y}-q_{y})^{2}}}\,}    defining the distance between two points P = ( p x , p y ) and Q = ( q x , q y ) is then known as the Euclidean metric , and other metrics define non-Euclidean geometries .
In terms of analytic geometry, the restriction of classical geometry to compass and straightedge constructions means a restriction to first- and second-order equations, e.g., y = 2 x + 1 (a line), or x 2 + y 2 = 7 (a circle).
Also in the 17th century, Girard Desargues , motivated by the theory of perspective , introduced the concept of idealized points, lines, and planes at infinity.
The result can be considered as a type of generalized geometry, projective geometry , but it can also be used to produce proofs in ordinary Euclidean geometry in which the number of special cases is reduced.
Squaring the circle: the areas of this square and this circle are equal.
In 1882, it was proven that this figure cannot be constructed in a finite number of steps with an idealized compass and straightedge .
18th century   Geometers of the 18th century struggled to define the boundaries of the Euclidean system.
Many tried in vain to prove the fifth postulate from the first four.
By 1763, at least 28 different proofs had been published, but all were found incorrect.
Leading up to this period, geometers also tried to determine what constructions could be accomplished in Euclidean geometry.
For example, the problem of trisecting an angle with a compass and straightedge is one that naturally occurs within the theory, since the axioms refer to constructive operations that can be carried out with those tools.
However, centuries of efforts failed to find a solution to this problem, until Pierre Wantzel published a proof in 1837 that such a construction was impossible.
Other constructions that were proved impossible include doubling the cube and squaring the circle .
In the case of doubling the cube, the impossibility of the construction originates from the fact that the compass and straightedge method involve equations whose order is an integral power of two,  while doubling a cube requires the solution of a third-order equation.
Euler discussed a generalization of Euclidean geometry called affine geometry , which retains the fifth postulate unmodified while weakening postulates three and four in a way that eliminates the notions of angle (whence right triangles become meaningless) and of equality of length of line segments in general (whence circles become meaningless) while retaining the notions of parallelism as an equivalence relation between lines, and equality of length of parallel line segments (so line segments continue to have a midpoint).
19th century   Comparison of elliptic, Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries in two dimensions  In the early 19th century, Carnot and Möbius systematically developed the use of signed angles and line segments as a way of simplifying and unifying results.
Higher dimensions   In the 1840s William Rowan Hamilton developed the quaternions , and John T.
Graves and Arthur Cayley the octonions .
These are normed algebras which extend the complex numbers .
Later it was understood that the quaternions are also a Euclidean geometric system with four real Cartesian coordinates.
Cayley used quaternions to study rotations in 4-dimensional Euclidean space .
At mid-century Ludwig Schläfli developed the general concept of Euclidean space , extending Euclidean geometry to higher dimensions .
He defined polyschemes , later called polytopes , which are the higher-dimensional analogues of polygons and polyhedra .
He developed their theory and discovered all the regular polytopes, i.e.
the     n    {\displaystyle n}   -dimensional analogues of regular polygons and Platonic solids .
He found there are six regular convex polytopes in dimension four , and three in all higher dimensions.
Regular convex 4-polytopes    Symmetry group   A 4   B 4   F 4   H 4    Name  5-cell  Hyper- tetrahedron 5-point   16-cell  Hyper- octahedron 8-point   8-cell  Hyper- cube 16-point   24-cell  24-point   600-cell  Hyper- icosahedron 120-point   120-cell  Hyper- dodecahedron 600-point    Schläfli symbol   {3, 3, 3}  {3, 3, 4}  {4, 3, 3}  {3, 4, 3}  {3, 3, 5}  {5, 3, 3}   Coxeter mirrors                Mirror dihedrals  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2   𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 4  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2   𝝅 / 4  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2   𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 4  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2   𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 5  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2   𝝅 / 5  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 3  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2  𝝅 / 2    Graph               Vertices  5 tetrahedral  8 octahedral  16 tetrahedral  24 cubical  120 icosahedral  600 tetrahedral   Edges   10 triangular  24 square  32 triangular  96 triangular  720 pentagonal  1200 triangular   Faces  10 triangles  32 triangles  24 squares  96 triangles  1200 triangles  720 pentagons   Cells  5 tetrahedra  16 tetrahedra  8 cubes  24 octahedra  600 tetrahedra  120 dodecahedra   Tori   1 5-tetrahedron   2 8-tetrahedron   2 4-cube   4 6-octahedron   20 30-tetrahedron   12 10-dodecahedron    Inscribed  120 in 120-cell  675 in 120-cell  2 16-cells  3 8-cells  25 24-cells  10 600-cells   Great polygons     2 squares x 3  4 rectangles x 4  4 hexagons x 4  12 decagons x 6  100 irregular hexagons x 4   Petrie polygons   1 pentagon x 2  1 octagon x 3  2 octagons x 4  2 dodecagons x 4  4 30-gons x 6  20 30-gons x 4   Long radius      1    {\displaystyle 1}         1    {\displaystyle 1}         1    {\displaystyle 1}         1    {\displaystyle 1}         1    {\displaystyle 1}         1    {\displaystyle 1}      Edge length          5  2      ≈  1.581    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {\tfrac {5}{2}}}\approx 1.581}           2    ≈  1.414    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}\approx 1.414}         1    {\displaystyle 1}         1    {\displaystyle 1}            1  ϕ     ≈  0.618    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{\phi }}\approx 0.618}            1    ϕ   2      2        ≈  0.270    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{\phi ^{2}{\sqrt {2}}}}\approx 0.270}      Short radius         1  4       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{4}}}            1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}            1  2       {\displaystyle {\tfrac {1}{2}}}             1  2      ≈  0.707    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {\tfrac {1}{2}}}\approx 0.707}              ϕ   4    8      ≈  0.926    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {\tfrac {\phi ^{4}}{8}}}\approx 0.926}              ϕ   4    8      ≈  0.926    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {\tfrac {\phi ^{4}}{8}}}\approx 0.926}      Area      10   (      5    3     8     )   ≈  10.825    {\displaystyle 10\left({\tfrac {5{\sqrt {3}}}{8}}\right)\approx 10.825}         32   (      3  4      )   ≈  27.713    {\displaystyle 32\left({\sqrt {\tfrac {3}{4}}}\right)\approx 27.713}         24    {\displaystyle 24}         96   (      3  16      )   ≈  41.569    {\displaystyle 96\left({\sqrt {\tfrac {3}{16}}}\right)\approx 41.569}         1200   (      3    4   ϕ   2        )   ≈  198.48    {\displaystyle 1200\left({\tfrac {\sqrt {3}}{4\phi ^{2}}}\right)\approx 198.48}         720   (      25  +  10    5      8   ϕ   4        )   ≈  90.366    {\displaystyle 720\left({\tfrac {\sqrt {25+10{\sqrt {5}}}}{8\phi ^{4}}}\right)\approx 90.366}      Volume      5   (      5    5     24     )   ≈  2.329    {\displaystyle 5\left({\tfrac {5{\sqrt {5}}}{24}}\right)\approx 2.329}         16   (     1  3     )   ≈  5.333    {\displaystyle 16\left({\tfrac {1}{3}}\right)\approx 5.333}         8    {\displaystyle 8}         24   (      2   3     )   ≈  11.314    {\displaystyle 24\left({\tfrac {\sqrt {2}}{3}}\right)\approx 11.314}         600   (      2    12   ϕ   3        )   ≈  16.693    {\displaystyle 600\left({\tfrac {\sqrt {2}}{12\phi ^{3}}}\right)\approx 16.693}         120   (      15  +  7    5      4   ϕ   6      8        )   ≈  18.118    {\displaystyle 120\left({\tfrac {15+7{\sqrt {5}}}{4\phi ^{6}{\sqrt {8}}}}\right)\approx 18.118}      4-Content          5   24       (      5   2     )    4    ≈  0.146    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {\sqrt {5}}{24}}\left({\tfrac {\sqrt {5}}{2}}\right)^{4}\approx 0.146}            2  3     ≈  0.667    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {2}{3}}\approx 0.667}         1    {\displaystyle 1}         2    {\displaystyle 2}              Short   ×   Vol    4     ≈  3.863    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {{\text{Short}}\times {\text{Vol}}}{4}}\approx 3.863}              Short   ×   Vol    4     ≈  4.193    {\displaystyle {\tfrac {{\text{Short}}\times {\text{Vol}}}{4}}\approx 4.193}     Schläfli performed this work in relative obscurity and it was published in full only posthumously in 1901.
It had little influence until it was rediscovered and fully documented in 1948 by H.S.M.
Coxeter .
In 1878 William Kingdon Clifford introduced what is now termed geometric algebra , unifying Hamilton's quaternions with Hermann Grassmann 's algebra and revealing the geometric nature of these systems, especially in four dimensions.
The operations of geometric algebra have the effect of mirroring, rotating, translating, and mapping the geometric objects that are being modeled to new positions.
The Clifford torus on the surface of the 3-sphere is the simplest and most symmetric flat embedding of the Cartesian product of two circles (in the same sense that the surface of a cylinder is "flat").
Non-Euclidean geometry   Main article: Non-Euclidean geometry  The century's most influential development in geometry occurred when, around 1830, János Bolyai and Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky separately published work on non-Euclidean geometry , in which the parallel postulate is not valid.
Since non-Euclidean geometry is provably relatively consistent with Euclidean geometry, the parallel postulate cannot be proved from the other postulates.
In the 19th century, it was also realized that Euclid's ten axioms and common notions do not suffice to prove all of the theorems stated in the Elements .
For example, Euclid assumed implicitly that any line contains at least two points, but this assumption cannot be proved from the other axioms, and therefore must be an axiom itself.
The very first geometric proof in the Elements, shown in the figure above, is that any line segment is part of a triangle; Euclid constructs this in the usual way, by drawing circles around both endpoints and taking their intersection as the third vertex .
His axioms, however, do not guarantee that the circles actually intersect, because they do not assert the geometrical property of continuity, which in Cartesian terms is equivalent to the completeness property of the real numbers.
Starting with Moritz Pasch in 1882, many improved axiomatic systems for geometry have been proposed, the best known being those of Hilbert ,   George Birkhoff ,  and Tarski .
20th century and relativity   A disproof of Euclidean geometry as a description of physical space.
In a 1919 test of the general theory of relativity, stars (marked with short horizontal lines) were photographed during a solar eclipse .
The rays of starlight were bent by the Sun's gravity on their way to Earth.
This is interpreted as evidence in favor of Einstein's prediction that gravity would cause deviations from Euclidean geometry.
Einstein's theory of special relativity involves a four-dimensional space-time , the Minkowski space , which is non-Euclidean .
This shows that non-Euclidean geometries, which had been introduced a few years earlier for showing that the parallel postulate cannot be proved, are also useful for describing the physical world.
However, the three-dimensional "space part" of the Minkowski space remains the space of Euclidean geometry.
This is not the case with general relativity , for which the geometry of the space part of space-time is not Euclidean geometry.
For example, if a triangle is constructed out of three rays of light, then in general the interior angles do not add up to 180 degrees due to gravity.
A relatively weak gravitational field, such as the Earth's or the Sun's, is represented by a metric that is approximately, but not exactly, Euclidean.
Until the 20th century, there was no technology capable of detecting these deviations in rays of light from Euclidean geometry, but Einstein predicted that such deviations would exist.
They were later verified by observations such as the slight bending of starlight by the Sun during a solar eclipse in 1919, and such considerations are now an integral part of the software that runs the GPS system.
As a description of the structure of space   Euclid believed that his axioms were self-evident statements about physical reality.
Euclid's proofs depend upon assumptions perhaps not obvious in Euclid's fundamental axioms,  in particular that certain movements of figures do not change their geometrical properties such as the lengths of sides and interior angles, the so-called Euclidean motions , which include translations, reflections and rotations of figures.
Taken as a physical description of space, postulate 2 (extending a line) asserts that space does not have holes or boundaries; postulate 4 (equality of right angles) says that space is isotropic and figures may be moved to any location while maintaining congruence ; and postulate 5 (the parallel postulate ) that space is flat (has no intrinsic curvature ).
As discussed above, Albert Einstein 's theory of relativity significantly modifies this view.
The ambiguous character of the axioms as originally formulated by Euclid makes it possible for different commentators to disagree about some of their other implications for the structure of space, such as whether or not it is infinite  (see below) and what its topology is.
Modern, more rigorous reformulations of the system  typically aim for a cleaner separation of these issues.
Interpreting Euclid's axioms in the spirit of this more modern approach, axioms 1–4 are consistent with either infinite or finite space (as in elliptic geometry ), and all five axioms are consistent with a variety of topologies (e.g., a plane, a cylinder, or a torus for two-dimensional Euclidean geometry).
Treatment of infinity   Infinite objects   Euclid sometimes distinguished explicitly between "finite lines" (e.g., Postulate 2) and " infinite lines" (book I, proposition 12).
However, he typically did not make such distinctions unless they were necessary.
The postulates do not explicitly refer to infinite lines, although for example some commentators interpret postulate 3, existence of a circle with any radius, as implying that space is infinite.
The notion of infinitesimal quantities had previously been discussed extensively by the Eleatic School , but nobody had been able to put them on a firm logical basis, with paradoxes such as Zeno's paradox occurring that had not been resolved to universal satisfaction.
Euclid used the method of exhaustion rather than infinitesimals.
Later ancient commentators, such as Proclus (410–485 CE), treated many questions about infinity as issues demanding proof and, e.g., Proclus claimed to prove the infinite divisibility of a line, based on a proof by contradiction in which he considered the cases of even and odd numbers of points constituting it.
At the turn of the 20th century, Otto Stolz , Paul du Bois-Reymond , Giuseppe Veronese , and others produced controversial work on non-Archimedean models of Euclidean geometry, in which the distance between two points may be infinite or infinitesimal, in the Newton – Leibniz sense.
Fifty years later, Abraham Robinson provided a rigorous logical foundation for Veronese's work.
Infinite processes   Ancient geometers may have considered the parallel postulate – that two parallel lines do not ever intersect – less certain than the others because it makes a statement about infinitely remote regions of space, and so cannot be physically verified.
The modern formulation of proof by induction was not developed until the 17th century, but some later commentators consider it implicit in some of Euclid's proofs, e.g., the proof of the infinitude of primes.
Supposed paradoxes involving infinite series, such as Zeno's paradox , predated Euclid.
Euclid avoided such discussions, giving, for example, the expression for the partial sums of the geometric series in IX.35 without commenting on the possibility of letting the number of terms become infinite.
Logical basis   This section needs expansion .
( June 2010 )  See also: Hilbert's axioms , Axiomatic system , and Real closed field  Classical logic   Euclid frequently used the method of proof by contradiction , and therefore the traditional presentation of Euclidean geometry assumes classical logic , in which every proposition is either true or false, i.e., for any proposition P, the proposition "P or not P" is automatically true.
Modern standards of rigor  Placing Euclidean geometry on a solid axiomatic basis was a preoccupation of mathematicians for centuries.
The role of primitive notions , or undefined concepts, was clearly put forward by Alessandro Padoa of the Peano delegation at the 1900 Paris conference:    ...when we begin to formulate the theory, we can imagine that the undefined symbols are completely devoid of meaning and that the unproved propositions are simply conditions imposed upon the undefined symbols.
Then, the system of ideas that we have initially chosen is simply one interpretation of the undefined symbols; but..this interpretation can be ignored by the reader, who is free to replace it in his mind by another interpretation ..
that satisfies the conditions...
Logical questions thus become completely independent of empirical or psychological questions...
The system of undefined symbols can then be regarded as the abstraction obtained from the specialized theories that result when...the system of undefined symbols is successively replaced by each of the interpretations...
— Padoa, Essai d'une théorie algébrique des nombre entiers, avec une Introduction logique à une théorie déductive quelconque  That is, mathematics is context-independent knowledge within a hierarchical framework.
As said by Bertrand Russell :    If our hypothesis is about anything , and not about some one or more particular things, then our deductions constitute mathematics.
Thus, mathematics may be defined as the subject in which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is true.
— Bertrand Russell, Mathematics and the metaphysicians  Such foundational approaches range between foundationalism and formalism .
Axiomatic formulations   Geometry is the science of correct reasoning on incorrect figures.
— George Pólya , How to Solve It , p.
208  Euclid's axioms: In his dissertation to Trinity College, Cambridge, Bertrand Russell summarized the changing role of Euclid's geometry in the minds of philosophers up to that time.
It was a conflict between certain knowledge, independent of experiment, and empiricism, requiring experimental input.
This issue became clear as it was discovered that the parallel postulate was not necessarily valid and its applicability was an empirical matter, deciding whether the applicable geometry was Euclidean or non-Euclidean .
Hilbert's axioms : Hilbert's axioms had the goal of identifying a simple and complete set of independent axioms from which the most important geometric theorems could be deduced.
The outstanding objectives were to make Euclidean geometry rigorous (avoiding hidden assumptions) and to make clear the ramifications of the parallel postulate.
Birkhoff's axioms : Birkhoff proposed four postulates for Euclidean geometry that can be confirmed experimentally with scale and protractor.
This system relies heavily on the properties of the real numbers .
The notions of angle and distance become primitive concepts.
Tarski's axioms : Alfred Tarski (1902–1983) and his students defined elementary Euclidean geometry as the geometry that can be expressed in first-order logic and does not depend on set theory for its logical basis,  in contrast to Hilbert's axioms, which involve point sets.
Tarski proved that his axiomatic formulation of elementary Euclidean geometry is consistent and complete in a certain sense : there is an algorithm that, for every proposition, can be shown either true or false.
(This does not violate Gödel's theorem , because Euclidean geometry cannot describe a sufficient amount of arithmetic for the theorem to apply.
 )
This is equivalent to the decidability of real closed fields , of which elementary Euclidean geometry is a model.
Standard system of axiomatic set theory  "ZFC" redirects here.
For other uses, see ZFC (disambiguation) .
( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  In set theory , Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory , named after mathematicians Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel , is an axiomatic system that was proposed in the early twentieth century in order to formulate a theory of sets free of paradoxes such as Russell's paradox .
Today, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, with the historically controversial axiom of choice (AC) included, is the standard form of axiomatic set theory and as such is the most common foundation of mathematics .
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice included is abbreviated ZFC , where C stands for "choice",  and ZF refers to the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice excluded.
Informally,  Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory is intended to formalize a single primitive notion, that of a hereditary  well-founded  set , so that all entities in the universe of discourse are such sets.
Thus the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory refer only to pure sets and prevent its models from containing urelements (elements of sets that are not themselves sets).
Furthermore, proper classes (collections of mathematical objects defined by a property shared by their members where the collections are too big to be sets) can only be treated indirectly.
Specifically, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory does not allow for the existence of a universal set (a set containing all sets) nor for unrestricted comprehension , thereby avoiding Russell's paradox.
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG) is a commonly used conservative extension of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory that does allow explicit treatment of proper classes.
There are many equivalent formulations of the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory.
Most of the axioms state the existence of particular sets defined from other sets.
For example, the axiom of pairing says that given any two sets     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   there is a new set     {  a  ,  b  }    {\displaystyle \{a,b\}}   containing exactly     a    {\displaystyle a}   and     b    {\displaystyle b}   .
Other axioms describe properties of set membership.
A goal of the axioms is that each axiom should be true if interpreted as a statement about the collection of all sets in the von Neumann universe (also known as the cumulative hierarchy).
The metamathematics of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory has been extensively studied.
Landmark results in this area established the logical independence of the axiom of choice from the remaining Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms (see Axiom of choice § Independence ) and of the continuum hypothesis from ZFC.
The consistency of a theory such as ZFC cannot be proved within the theory itself, as shown by Gödel's second incompleteness theorem .
History   Main article: History of set theory  The modern study of set theory was initiated by Georg Cantor and Richard Dedekind in the 1870s.
However, the discovery of paradoxes in naive set theory , such as Russell's paradox , led to the desire for a more rigorous form of set theory that was free of these paradoxes.
In 1908, Ernst Zermelo proposed the first axiomatic set theory , Zermelo set theory .
However, as first pointed out by Abraham Fraenkel in a 1921 letter to Zermelo, this theory was incapable of proving the existence of certain sets and cardinal numbers whose existence was taken for granted by most set theorists of the time, notably the cardinal number      ℵ   ω      {\displaystyle \aleph _{\omega }}   and the set     {   Z   0    ,    P    (   Z   0    )  ,    P    (    P    (   Z   0    )  )  ,    P    (    P    (    P    (   Z   0    )  )  )  ,  .
,    {\displaystyle \{Z_{0},{\mathcal {P}}(Z_{0}),{\mathcal {P}}({\mathcal {P}}(Z_{0})),{\mathcal {P}}({\mathcal {P}}({\mathcal {P}}(Z_{0}))),...\},}   where      Z   0      {\displaystyle Z_{0}}   is any infinite set and       P      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}}   is the power set operation.
Moreover, one of Zermelo's axioms invoked a concept, that of a "definite" property, whose operational meaning was not clear.
In 1922, Fraenkel and Thoralf Skolem independently proposed operationalizing a "definite" property as one that could be formulated as a well-formed formula in a first-order logic whose atomic formulas were limited to set membership and identity.
They also independently proposed replacing the axiom schema of specification with the axiom schema of replacement .
Appending this schema, as well as the axiom of regularity (first proposed by John von Neumann ),  to Zermelo set theory yields the theory denoted by ZF .
Adding to ZF either the axiom of choice (AC) or a statement that is equivalent to it yields ZFC.
Formal language   See also: Formal language  Formally, ZFC is a one-sorted theory in first-order logic .
Equality is treated as a primitive logical symbol and the signature has a single primitive non-logical symbol, usually denoted     ∈    {\displaystyle \in }   , which is a predicate symbol of arity 2 (a relation symbol).
This symbol is intended to symbolize a set membership relation.
For example, the formula      a  ∈  b    {\displaystyle a\in b}   means that the set a is an element of the set b (also read as a is a member of b ).
The language's alphabet consists of:  A countably infinite amount of variables used for representing sets (usually Latin letters with or without subscripts)  The logical connectives     ¬    {\displaystyle \lnot }   ,     ∧    {\displaystyle \land }   ,     ∨    {\displaystyle \lor }   ,     ⇒    {\displaystyle \Rightarrow }   and     ⇔    {\displaystyle \Leftrightarrow }   (     →    {\displaystyle \rightarrow }   and     ↔    {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow }   are simpler typographical variants)  The universal and existential quantifier symbols     ∀    {\displaystyle \forall }   and     ∃    {\displaystyle \exists }    The equality symbol     =    {\displaystyle =}    The set membership symbol     ∈    {\displaystyle \in }    Parentheses ( )  With this alphabet, the iterative rules for forming well-formed formulae are as follows:  These are valid well-formed formulae:      v  =  w    {\displaystyle v=w}        v  ∈  w    {\displaystyle v\in w}    If     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   is a well-formed formula, then so is:      ¬  ϕ    {\displaystyle \lnot \phi }    If     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   and     ψ    {\displaystyle \psi }   are well-formed formulae, then so are:      (  ϕ  ∧  ψ  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \land \psi )}        (  ϕ  ∨  ψ  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \lor \psi )}        (  ϕ  ⇒  ψ  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \Rightarrow \psi )}        (  ϕ  ⇔  ψ  )    {\displaystyle (\phi \Leftrightarrow \psi )}    If     ϕ    {\displaystyle \phi }   is a well-formed formula, then so are:      ∀  v  ϕ    {\displaystyle \forall v\phi }        ∃  v  ϕ    {\displaystyle \exists v\phi }        v    {\displaystyle v}   and     w    {\displaystyle w}   above are metavariables standing for any variables .
The first rule describes the two ways to build an atomic formula .
As a general rule, parentheses may be dropped if doing so wouldn't cause ambiguity.
A statement in set-builder notation abbreviates a well-formed formula, while an expression representing a mathematical object abbreviates a noun phrase in the metalanguage denoting a specific set X that satisfies a specific logic formula.
The following table illustrates some correspondences:   Set-builder notation  Formal language       A  ≠  B    {\displaystyle A\neq B}        ¬      {\displaystyle \lnot }          A  ∉  B    {\displaystyle A\notin B}        ¬      {\displaystyle \lnot }          A  ⊆  B    {\displaystyle A\subseteq B}        ∀  x      {\displaystyle \forall x}          A  ⊂  B    {\displaystyle A\subset B}        ∀  x    ∧  ¬      {\displaystyle \forall x\land \lnot }          ∀  x  ∈  A  ,    x  ∈  B    {\displaystyle \forall x\in A,\ x\in B}        ∀  x      {\displaystyle \forall x}          ∃  x  ∈  A  ,    x  ∈  B    {\displaystyle \exists x\in A,\ x\in B}        ∃  x      {\displaystyle \exists x}          ∅    {\displaystyle \varnothing }        ∀  x    ¬      {\displaystyle \forall x\ \lnot }          B  ∖  A    {\displaystyle B\setminus A}        ∀  x      {\displaystyle \forall x}          A  ∩  B    {\displaystyle A\cap B}        ∀  x      {\displaystyle \forall x}          A  ∪  B    {\displaystyle A\cup B}        ∀  x      {\displaystyle \forall x}          {  A  ,  B  }    {\displaystyle \{A,B\}}        ∀  x      {\displaystyle \forall x}     Axioms   See also: Axiom  There are many equivalent formulations of the ZFC axioms; for a discussion of this, see Fraenkel, Bar-Hillel & Lévy 1973 .
The following particular axiom set is from Kunen (1980) .
The axioms per se are expressed in the symbolism of first order logic .
The associated English prose is only intended to aid the intuition.
Axioms 1-8 form ZF, while the axiom 9 turns ZF into ZFC.
Following Kunen (1980) , we use the equivalent well-ordering theorem in place of the axiom of choice for axiom 9 .
All formulations of ZFC imply that at least one set exists.
Kunen includes an axiom that directly asserts the existence of a set, in addition to the axioms given below (although he notes that he does so only "for emphasis").
Its omission here can be justified in two ways.
First, in the standard semantics of first-order logic in which ZFC is typically formalized, the domain of discourse must be nonempty.
Hence, it is a logical theorem of first-order logic that something exists — usually expressed as the assertion that something is identical to itself,     ∃  x  (  x  =  x  )    {\displaystyle \exists x(x=x)}   .
Consequently, it is a theorem of every first-order theory that something exists.
However, as noted above, because in the intended semantics of ZFC, there are only sets, the interpretation of this logical theorem in the context of ZFC is that some set exists.
Hence, there is no need for a separate axiom asserting that a set exists.
Second, however, even if ZFC is formulated in so-called free logic , in which it is not provable from logic alone that something exists, the axiom of infinity (below) asserts that an infinite set exists.
This implies that a set exists, and so, once again, it is superfluous to include an axiom asserting as much.
Axiom of extensionality   Main article: Axiom of extensionality  Two sets are equal (are the same set) if they have the same elements.
∀  x  ∀  y    .
{\displaystyle \forall x\forall y.}
The converse of this axiom follows from the substitution property of equality .
ZFC is constructed in first-order logic.
Some formulations of first-order logic include identity; others do not.
If the variety of first-order logic in which you are constructing set theory does not include equality "     =    {\displaystyle =}   ",     x  =  y    {\displaystyle x=y}   may be defined as an abbreviation for the following formula:       ∀  z    ∧  ∀  w    .
{\displaystyle \forall z\land \forall w.}    In this case, the axiom of extensionality can be reformulated as      ∀  x  ∀  y    ,    {\displaystyle \forall x\forall y,}    which says that if     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   have the same elements, then they belong to the same sets.
Axiom of regularity (also called the axiom of foundation)   Main article: Axiom of regularity  Every non-empty set     x    {\displaystyle x}   contains a member     y    {\displaystyle y}   such that     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   are disjoint sets .
∀  x    .
{\displaystyle \forall x.}
or in modern notation:     ∀  x   (  x  ≠  ∅  ⇒  ∃  y  (  y  ∈  x  ∧  y  ∩  x  =  ∅  )  )  .
{\displaystyle \forall x\,(x\neq \varnothing \Rightarrow \exists y(y\in x\land y\cap x=\varnothing )).}
This (along with the axiom of pairing) implies, for example, that no set is an element of itself and that every set has an ordinal  rank .
Axiom schema of specification (or of separation, or of restricted comprehension)   Main article: Axiom schema of specification  Subsets are commonly constructed using set builder notation .
For example, the even integers can be constructed as the subset of the integers      Z     {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} }   satisfying the congruence modulo predicate     x  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )     {\displaystyle x\equiv 0{\pmod {2}}}   :      {  x  ∈   Z   :  x  ≡  0    (  mod   2  )   }  .
{\displaystyle \{x\in \mathbb {Z} :x\equiv 0{\pmod {2}}\}.}
In general, the subset of a set     z    {\displaystyle z}   obeying a formula     φ  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \varphi (x)}   with one free variable     x    {\displaystyle x}   may be written as:      {  x  ∈  z  :  φ  (  x  )  }  .
{\displaystyle \{x\in z:\varphi (x)\}.}
The axiom schema of specification states that this subset always exists (it is an axiom schema because there is one axiom for each     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   ).
Formally, let     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   be any formula in the language of ZFC with all free variables among     x  ,  z  ,   w   1    ,  …  ,   w   n      {\displaystyle x,z,w_{1},\ldots ,w_{n}}   (     y    {\displaystyle y}   is not free in     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   ).
Then:      ∀  z  ∀   w   1    ∀   w   2    …  ∀   w   n    ∃  y  ∀  x    .
{\displaystyle \forall z\forall w_{1}\forall w_{2}\ldots \forall w_{n}\exists y\forall x.}
Note that the axiom schema of specification can only construct subsets and does not allow the construction of entities of the more general form:      {  x  :  φ  (  x  )  }  .
{\displaystyle \{x:\varphi (x)\}.}
This restriction is necessary to avoid Russell's paradox (let     y  =  {  x  :  x  ∉  x  }    {\displaystyle y=\{x:x\notin x\}}   then     y  ∈  y  ⇔  y  ∉  y    {\displaystyle y\in y\Leftrightarrow y\notin y}   ) and its variants that accompany naive set theory with unrestricted comprehension (since under this restriction     y    {\displaystyle y}   only refers to sets within      z    {\displaystyle z}   that don't belong to themselves, and     y  ∈  z    {\displaystyle y\in z}   has not been established -even though     y  ⊆  z    {\displaystyle y\subseteq z}   is the case-, so     y    {\displaystyle y}   stands in a separate position from which it can't refer to or comprehend itself; therefore, in a certain sense, this axiom schema is saying that in order to build a     y    {\displaystyle y}   on the basis of a formula     φ  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \varphi (x)}   , we need to previously restrict the sets     y    {\displaystyle y}   will regard within a set     z    {\displaystyle z}   that leaves     y    {\displaystyle y}   outside so     y    {\displaystyle y}   can't refer to itself; or, in other words, sets shouldn't refer to themselves).
In some other axiomatizations of ZF, this axiom is redundant in that it follows from the axiom schema of replacement and the axiom of the empty set .
On the other hand, the axiom schema of specification can be used to prove the existence of the empty set , denoted     ∅    {\displaystyle \varnothing }   , once at least one set is known to exist (see above).
One way to do this is to use a property     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   which no set has.
For example, if     w    {\displaystyle w}   is any existing set, the empty set can be constructed as      ∅  =  {  u  ∈  w  ∣  (  u  ∈  u  )  ∧  ¬  (  u  ∈  u  )  }  .
{\displaystyle \varnothing =\{u\in w\mid (u\in u)\land \lnot (u\in u)\}.}
Thus, the axiom of the empty set is implied by the nine axioms presented here.
The axiom of extensionality implies the empty set is unique (does not depend on     w    {\displaystyle w}   ).
It is common to make a definitional extension that adds the symbol "     ∅    {\displaystyle \varnothing }   " to the language of ZFC.
Axiom of pairing   Main article: Axiom of pairing  If     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   are sets, then there exists a set which contains     x    {\displaystyle x}   and     y    {\displaystyle y}   as elements, for example if x = {1,2} and y = {2,3} then z will be {{1,2},{2,3}}      ∀  x  ∀  y  ∃  z  (  (  x  ∈  z  )  ∧  (  y  ∈  z  )  )  .
{\displaystyle \forall x\forall y\exists z((x\in z)\land (y\in z)).}
The axiom schema of specification must be used to reduce this to a set with exactly these two elements.
The axiom of pairing is part of Z, but is redundant in ZF because it follows from the axiom schema of replacement if we are given a set with at least two elements.
The existence of a set with at least two elements is assured by either the axiom of infinity , or by the axiom schema of specification  and the axiom of the power set applied twice to any set.
Axiom of union   Main article: Axiom of union  The union over the elements of a set exists.
For example, the union over the elements of the set     {  {  1  ,  2  }  ,  {  2  ,  3  }  }    {\displaystyle \{\{1,2\},\{2,3\}\}}   is     {  1  ,  2  ,  3  }  .
{\displaystyle \{1,2,3\}.}
The axiom of union states that for any set of sets       F      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}}   , there is a set     A    {\displaystyle A}   containing every element that is a member of some member of       F      {\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}}   :      ∀    F     ∃  A   ∀  Y   ∀  x    .
{\displaystyle \forall {\mathcal {F}}\,\exists A\,\forall Y\,\forall x.}
Although this formula doesn't directly assert the existence of     ∪    F      {\displaystyle \cup {\mathcal {F}}}   , the set     ∪    F      {\displaystyle \cup {\mathcal {F}}}   can be constructed from     A    {\displaystyle A}   in the above using the axiom schema of specification:      ∪    F    =  {  x  ∈  A  :  ∃  Y  (  x  ∈  Y  ∧  Y  ∈    F    )  }  .
{\displaystyle \cup {\mathcal {F}}=\{x\in A:\exists Y(x\in Y\land Y\in {\mathcal {F}})\}.}
Axiom schema of replacement   Main article: Axiom schema of replacement  The axiom schema of replacement asserts that the image of a set under any definable function will also fall inside a set.
Formally, let     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   be any formula in the language of ZFC whose free variables are among     x  ,  y  ,  A  ,   w   1    ,  …  ,   w   n    ,    {\displaystyle x,y,A,w_{1},\dotsc ,w_{n},}   so that in particular     B    {\displaystyle B}   is not free in     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   .
Then:      ∀  A  ∀   w   1    ∀   w   2    …  ∀   w   n          .
{\displaystyle \forall A\forall w_{1}\forall w_{2}\ldots \forall w_{n}{\bigl }.}
(The unique existential quantifier     ∃  !
{\displaystyle \exists !}
denotes the existence of exactly one element such that it follows a given statement.
For more, see uniqueness quantification .)
In other words, if the relation     φ    {\displaystyle \varphi }   represents a definable function     f    {\displaystyle f}   ,     A    {\displaystyle A}   represents its domain , and     f  (  x  )    {\displaystyle f(x)}   is a set for every     x  ∈  A  ,    {\displaystyle x\in A,}   then the range of     f    {\displaystyle f}   is a subset of some set     B    {\displaystyle B}   .
The form stated here, in which     B    {\displaystyle B}   may be larger than strictly necessary, is sometimes called the axiom schema of collection .
7.
Axiom of infinity   Main article: Axiom of infinity  First several von Neumann ordinals  0  =  {}  =  ∅   1  =  {0}  =  {∅}   2  =  {0,1}  =  {∅,{∅}}   3  =  {0,1,2}  =  {∅,{∅},{∅,{∅}}}   4  =  {0,1,2,3}  =  {∅,{∅},{∅,{∅}},{∅,{∅},{∅,{∅}}}}  Let     S  (  w  )    {\displaystyle S(w)}   abbreviate     w  ∪  {  w  }  ,    {\displaystyle w\cup \{w\},}   where     w    {\displaystyle w}   is some set.
(We can see that     {  w  }    {\displaystyle \{w\}}   is a valid set by applying the axiom of pairing with     x  =  y  =  w    {\displaystyle x=y=w}   so that the set z is     {  w  }    {\displaystyle \{w\}}   ).
Then there exists a set X such that the empty set     ∅    {\displaystyle \varnothing }   , defined axiomatically, is a member of X and, whenever a set y is a member of X then     S  (  y  )    {\displaystyle S(y)}   is also a member of X .
∃  X      .
{\displaystyle \exists X\left.}
More colloquially, there exists a set X having infinitely many members.
(It must be established, however, that these members are all different because if two elements are the same, the sequence will loop around in a finite cycle of sets.
The axiom of regularity prevents this from happening.)
The minimal set X satisfying the axiom of infinity is the von Neumann ordinal  ω which can also be thought of as the set of natural numbers       N   .
8.
Axiom of power set   Main article: Axiom of power set  By definition, a set     z    {\displaystyle z}   is a subset of a set     x    {\displaystyle x}   if and only if every element of     z    {\displaystyle z}   is also an element of     x    {\displaystyle x}   :      (  z  ⊆  x  )  ⇔  (  ∀  q  (  q  ∈  z  ⇒  q  ∈  x  )  )  .
{\displaystyle (z\subseteq x)\Leftrightarrow (\forall q(q\in z\Rightarrow q\in x)).}
The Axiom of power set states that for any set     x    {\displaystyle x}   , there is a set     y    {\displaystyle y}   that contains every subset of     x    {\displaystyle x}   :      ∀  x  ∃  y  ∀  z  (  z  ⊆  x  ⇒  z  ∈  y  )  .
{\displaystyle \forall x\exists y\forall z(z\subseteq x\Rightarrow z\in y).}
The axiom schema of specification is then used to define the power set        P    (  x  )    {\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}(x)}   as the subset of such a     y    {\displaystyle y}   containing the subsets of     x    {\displaystyle x}   exactly:        P    (  x  )  =  {  z  ∈  y  :  z  ⊆  x  }  .
{\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}(x)=\{z\in y:z\subseteq x\}.}
Axioms 1–8 define ZF.
Alternative forms of these axioms are often encountered, some of which are listed in Jech (2003) .
Some ZF axiomatizations include an axiom asserting that the empty set exists .
The axioms of pairing, union, replacement, and power set are often stated so that the members of the set     x    {\displaystyle x}   whose existence is being asserted are just those sets which the axiom asserts     x    {\displaystyle x}   must contain.
The following axiom is added to turn ZF into ZFC:  9.
Axiom of well-ordering (choice)   Main article: Axiom of choice  Main article: Well-ordering theorem  Main article: Zorn's lemma  The last axiom, commonly known as the axiom of choice , is presented here as a property about well-orders , as in Kunen (1980) .
For any set     X    {\displaystyle X}   , there exists a binary relation      R    {\displaystyle R}   which well-orders      X    {\displaystyle X}   .
This means     R    {\displaystyle R}   is a linear order on     X    {\displaystyle X}   such that every nonempty subset of     X    {\displaystyle X}   has a member which is minimal under     R    {\displaystyle R}   .
∀  X  ∃  R  (  R     well-orders     X  )  .
{\displaystyle \forall X\exists R(R\;{\mbox{well-orders}}\;X).}
Given axioms 1 – 8 , many statements are provably equivalent to axiom 9 .
The most common of these goes as follows.
Let     X    {\displaystyle X}   be a set whose members are all nonempty.
Then there exists a function     f    {\displaystyle f}   from     X    {\displaystyle X}   to the union of the members of     X    {\displaystyle X}   , called a " choice function ", such that for all     Y  ∈  X    {\displaystyle Y\in X}   one has     f  (  Y  )  ∈  Y    {\displaystyle f(Y)\in Y}   .
A third version of the axiom, also equivalent, is Zorn's lemma .
Since the existence of a choice function when     X    {\displaystyle X}   is a finite set is easily proved from axioms 1–8 , AC only matters for certain infinite sets .
AC is characterized as nonconstructive because it asserts the existence of a choice function but says nothing about how this choice function is to be "constructed".
Motivation via the cumulative hierarchy   Further information: Von Neumann universe  One motivation for the ZFC axioms is the cumulative hierarchy of sets introduced by John von Neumann .
In this viewpoint, the universe of set theory is built up in stages, with one stage for each ordinal number .
At stage 0, there are no sets yet.
At each following stage, a set is added to the universe if all of its elements have been added at previous stages.
Thus the empty set is added at stage 1, and the set containing the empty set is added at stage 2.
The collection of all sets that are obtained in this way, over all the stages, is known as V .
The sets in V can be arranged into a hierarchy by assigning to each set the first stage at which that set was added to V .
It is provable that a set is in V if and only if the set is pure and well-founded .
And V satisfies all the axioms of ZFC if the class of ordinals has appropriate reflection properties.
For example, suppose that a set x is added at stage α, which means that every element of x was added at a stage earlier than α.
Then, every subset of x is also added at (or before) stage α, because all elements of any subset of x were also added before stage α.
This means that any subset of x which the axiom of separation can construct is added at (or before) stage α, and that the powerset of x will be added at the next stage after α.
For a complete argument that V satisfies ZFC see Shoenfield (1977) .
The picture of the universe of sets stratified into the cumulative hierarchy is characteristic of ZFC and related axiomatic set theories such as Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (often called NBG) and Morse–Kelley set theory .
The cumulative hierarchy is not compatible with other set theories such as New Foundations .
It is possible to change the definition of V so that at each stage, instead of adding all the subsets of the union of the previous stages, subsets are only added if they are definable in a certain sense.
This results in a more "narrow" hierarchy, which gives the constructible universe  L , which also satisfies all the axioms of ZFC, including the axiom of choice.
It is independent from the ZFC axioms whether V = L .
Although the structure of L is more regular and well behaved than that of V , few mathematicians argue that V = L should be added to ZFC as an additional " axiom of constructibility ".
Metamathematics   Virtual classes   Proper classes (collections of mathematical objects defined by a property shared by their members which are too big to be sets) can only be treated indirectly in ZF (and thus ZFC).
An alternative to proper classes while staying within ZF and ZFC is the virtual class notational construct introduced by Quine (1969) , where the entire construct y ∈ { x | F x } is simply defined as F y .
This provides a simple notation for classes that can contain sets but need not themselves be sets, while not committing to the ontology of classes (because the notation can be syntactically converted to one that only uses sets).
Quine's approach built on the earlier approach of Bernays & Fraenkel (1958) .
Virtual classes are also used in Levy (2002) , Takeuti & Zaring (1982) , and in the Metamath implementation of ZFC.
Finite axiomatization   Main article: Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory  The axiom schemata of replacement and separation each contain infinitely many instances.
Montague (1961) included a result first proved in his 1957 Ph.D. thesis: if ZFC is consistent, it is impossible to axiomatize ZFC using only finitely many axioms.
On the other hand, von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG) can be finitely axiomatized.
The ontology of NBG includes proper classes as well as sets; a set is any class that can be a member of another class.
NBG and ZFC are equivalent set theories in the sense that any theorem not mentioning classes and provable in one theory can be proved in the other.
Consistency   Gödel's second incompleteness theorem says that a recursively axiomatizable system that can interpret Robinson arithmetic can prove its own consistency only if it is inconsistent.
Moreover, Robinson arithmetic can be interpreted in general set theory , a small fragment of ZFC.
Hence the consistency of ZFC cannot be proved within ZFC itself (unless it is actually inconsistent).
Thus, to the extent that ZFC is identified with ordinary mathematics, the consistency of ZFC cannot be demonstrated in ordinary mathematics.
The consistency of ZFC does follow from the existence of a weakly inaccessible cardinal , which is unprovable in ZFC if ZFC is consistent.
Nevertheless, it is deemed unlikely that ZFC harbors an unsuspected contradiction; it is widely believed that if ZFC were inconsistent, that fact would have been uncovered by now.
This much is certain — ZFC is immune to the classic paradoxes of naive set theory : Russell's paradox , the Burali-Forti paradox , and Cantor's paradox .
Abian & LaMacchia (1978) studied a subtheory of ZFC consisting of the axioms of extensionality, union, powerset, replacement, and choice.
Using models , they proved this subtheory consistent, and proved that each of the axioms of extensionality, replacement, and power set is independent of the four remaining axioms of this subtheory.
If this subtheory is augmented with the axiom of infinity, each of the axioms of union, choice, and infinity is independent of the five remaining axioms.
Because there are non-well-founded models that satisfy each axiom of ZFC except the axiom of regularity, that axiom is independent of the other ZFC axioms.
If consistent, ZFC cannot prove the existence of the inaccessible cardinals that category theory requires.
Huge sets of this nature are possible if ZF is augmented with Tarski's axiom .
Assuming that axiom turns the axioms of infinity , power set , and choice ( 7 – 9 above) into theorems.
Independence   Many important statements are independent of ZFC (see list of statements independent of ZFC ).
The independence is usually proved by forcing , whereby it is shown that every countable transitive model of ZFC (sometimes augmented with large cardinal axioms ) can be expanded to satisfy the statement in question.
A different expansion is then shown to satisfy the negation of the statement.
An independence proof by forcing automatically proves independence from arithmetical statements, other concrete statements, and large cardinal axioms.
Some statements independent of ZFC can be proven to hold in particular inner models , such as in the constructible universe .
However, some statements that are true about constructible sets are not consistent with hypothesized large cardinal axioms.
Forcing proves that the following statements are independent of ZFC:  Axiom of constructibility (V=L) (which is also not a ZFC axiom)  Continuum hypothesis  Diamond principle  Martin's axiom (which is not a ZFC axiom)  Suslin hypothesis  Remarks:  The consistency of V=L is provable by inner models but not forcing: every model of ZF can be trimmed to become a model of ZFC + V=L.
The diamond principle implies the continuum hypothesis and the negation of the Suslin hypothesis.
Martin's axiom plus the negation of the continuum hypothesis implies the Suslin hypothesis.
The constructible universe satisfies the generalized continuum hypothesis , the diamond principle, Martin's axiom and the Kurepa hypothesis.
The failure of the Kurepa hypothesis is equiconsistent with the existence of a strongly inaccessible cardinal .
A variation on the method of forcing can also be used to demonstrate the consistency and unprovability of the axiom of choice , i.e., that the axiom of choice is independent of ZF.
The consistency of choice can be (relatively) easily verified by proving that the inner model L satisfies choice.
(Thus every model of ZF contains a submodel of ZFC, so that Con(ZF) implies Con(ZFC).)
Since forcing preserves choice, we cannot directly produce a model contradicting choice from a model satisfying choice.
However, we can use forcing to create a model which contains a suitable submodel, namely one satisfying ZF but not C.
Another method of proving independence results, one owing nothing to forcing, is based on Gödel's second incompleteness theorem.
This approach employs the statement whose independence is being examined, to prove the existence of a set model of ZFC, in which case Con(ZFC) is true.
Since ZFC satisfies the conditions of Gödel's second theorem, the consistency of ZFC is unprovable in ZFC (provided that ZFC is, in fact, consistent).
Hence no statement allowing such a proof can be proved in ZFC.
This method can prove that the existence of large cardinals is not provable in ZFC, but cannot prove that assuming such cardinals, given ZFC, is free of contradiction.
Proposed additions   The project to unify set theorists behind additional axioms to resolve the continuum hypothesis or other meta-mathematical ambiguities is sometimes known as "Gödel's program".
Mathematicians currently debate which axioms are the most plausible or "self-evident", which axioms are the most useful in various domains, and about to what degree usefulness should be traded off with plausibility; some " multiverse " set theorists argue that usefulness should be the sole ultimate criterion in which axioms to customarily adopt.
One school of thought leans on expanding the "iterative" concept of a set to produce a set-theoretic universe with an interesting and complex but reasonably tractable structure by adopting forcing axioms; another school advocates for a tidier, less cluttered universe, perhaps focused on a "core" inner model.
Criticisms   For criticism of set theory in general, see Objections to set theory  ZFC has been criticized both for being excessively strong and for being excessively weak, as well as for its failure to capture objects such as proper classes and the universal set .
Many mathematical theorems can be proven in much weaker systems than ZFC, such as Peano arithmetic and second-order arithmetic (as explored by the program of reverse mathematics ).
Saunders Mac Lane and Solomon Feferman have both made this point.
Some of "mainstream mathematics" (mathematics not directly connected with axiomatic set theory) is beyond Peano arithmetic and second-order arithmetic, but still, all such mathematics can be carried out in ZC ( Zermelo set theory with choice), another theory weaker than ZFC.
Much of the power of ZFC, including the axiom of regularity and the axiom schema of replacement, is included primarily to facilitate the study of the set theory itself.
On the other hand, among axiomatic set theories , ZFC is comparatively weak.
Unlike new foundations , ZFC does not admit the existence of a universal set.
Hence the universe of sets under ZFC is not closed under the elementary operations of the algebra of sets .
Unlike von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG) and Morse–Kelley set theory (MK), ZFC does not admit the existence of proper classes .
A further comparative weakness of ZFC is that the axiom of choice included in ZFC is weaker than the axiom of global choice included in NBG and MK.
There are numerous mathematical statements independent of ZFC .
These include the continuum hypothesis , the Whitehead problem , and the normal Moore space conjecture .
Some of these conjectures are provable with the addition of axioms such as Martin's axiom or large cardinal axioms to ZFC.
Some others are decided in ZF+AD where AD is the axiom of determinacy , a strong supposition incompatible with choice.
One attraction of large cardinal axioms is that they enable many results from ZF+AD to be established in ZFC adjoined by some large cardinal axiom (see projective determinacy ).
The Mizar system and metamath have adopted Tarski–Grothendieck set theory , an extension of ZFC, so that proofs involving Grothendieck universes (encountered in category theory and algebraic geometry) can be formalized.
The mathematical statements discussed below are provably independent of ZFC (the canonical axiomatic set theory of contemporary mathematics, consisting of the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms plus the axiom of choice ), assuming that ZFC is consistent .
A statement is independent of ZFC (sometimes phrased "undecidable in ZFC") if it can neither be proven nor disproven from the axioms of ZFC.
Axiomatic set theory  Further information: Axiomatic set theory In 1931, Kurt Gödel proved his incompleteness theorems , establishing that many mathematical theories, including ZFC, cannot prove their own consistency.
Assuming ω-consistency of such a theory, the consistency statement can also not be disproven, meaning it is independent.
A few years later, other arithmetic statements were defined that are independent of any such theory, see for example Rosser's trick .
The following set theoretic statements are independent of ZFC, among others: the continuum hypothesis or CH (Gödel produced a model of ZFC in which CH is true, showing that CH cannot be disproven in ZFC; Paul Cohen later invented the method of forcing to exhibit a model of ZFC in which CH fails, showing that CH cannot be proven in ZFC.
The following four independence results are also due to Gödel/Cohen.
);  the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH);  a related independent statement is that if a set x has fewer elements than y , then x also has fewer subsets than y .
In particular, this statement fails when the cardinalities of the power sets of x and y coincide;  the axiom of constructibility ( V = L );  the diamond principle (◊);  Martin's axiom (MA);  MA + ¬CH (independence shown by Solovay and Tennenbaum ).
Every Aronszajn tree is special (EATS); Diagram showing the implication chains We have the following chains of implications: V = L → ◊ → CH,  V = L → GCH → CH,  CH → MA, and (see section on order theory): ◊ → ¬ SH ,  MA + ¬CH → EATS → SH.
Several statements related to the existence of large cardinals cannot be proven in ZFC (assuming ZFC is consistent).
These are independent of ZFC provided that they are consistent with ZFC, which most working set theorists believe to be the case.
These statements are strong enough to imply the consistency of ZFC.
This has the consequence (via Gödel's second incompleteness theorem ) that their consistency with ZFC cannot be proven in ZFC (assuming ZFC is consistent).
The following statements belong to this class: Existence of inaccessible cardinals  Existence of Mahlo cardinals  Existence of measurable cardinals (first conjectured by Ulam )  Existence of supercompact cardinals The following statements can be proven to be independent of ZFC assuming the consistency of a suitable large cardinal: Proper forcing axiom  Open coloring axiom  Martin's maximum  Existence of 0 #  Singular cardinals hypothesis  Projective determinacy (and even the full axiom of determinacy if the axiom of choice is not assumed) Set theory of the real line  Further information: Set theory of the real line There are many cardinal invariants of the real line, connected with measure theory and statements related to the Baire category theorem , whose exact values are independent of ZFC.
While nontrivial relations can be proved between them, most cardinal invariants can be any regular cardinal between ℵ 1 and 2 ℵ 0 .
This is a major area of study in the set theory of the real line (see Cichon diagram ).
MA has a tendency to set most interesting cardinal invariants equal to 2 ℵ 0 .
A subset X of the real line is a strong measure zero set if to every sequence ( ε n ) of positive reals there exists a sequence of intervals ( I n ) which covers X and such that I n has length at most ε n .
Borel's conjecture, that every strong measure zero set is countable, is independent of ZFC.
A subset X of the real line is      ℵ   1      {\displaystyle \aleph _{1}}   -dense if every open interval contains      ℵ   1      {\displaystyle \aleph _{1}}   -many elements of X .
Whether all      ℵ   1      {\displaystyle \aleph _{1}}   -dense sets are order-isomorphic is independent of ZFC.
Order theory  Further information: Order theory Suslin's problem asks whether a specific short list of properties characterizes the ordered set of real numbers R .
This is undecidable in ZFC.
A Suslin line is an ordered set which satisfies this specific list of properties but is not order-isomorphic to R .
The diamond principle ◊ proves the existence of a Suslin line, while MA + ¬CH implies EATS ( every Aronszajn tree is special ),  which in turn implies (but is not equivalent to)  the nonexistence of Suslin lines.
Ronald Jensen proved that CH does not imply the existence of a Suslin line.
Existence of Kurepa trees is independent of ZFC, assuming consistency of an inaccessible cardinal .
Existence of a partition of the ordinal number       ω   2      {\displaystyle \omega _{2}}   into two colors with no monochromatic uncountable sequentially closed subset is independent of ZFC, ZFC + CH, and ZFC + ¬CH, assuming consistency of a Mahlo cardinal .
This theorem of Shelah answers a question of H.
Friedman .
Abstract algebra  Further information: Abstract algebra In 1973, Saharon Shelah showed that the Whitehead problem ("is every abelian group  A with Ext 1 (A, Z ) = 0 a free abelian group ?")
is independent of ZFC.
An abelian group with Ext 1 (A, Z ) = 0 is called a Whitehead group; MA + ¬CH proves the existence of a non-free Whitehead group, while V = L proves that all Whitehead groups are free.
In one of the earliest applications of proper forcing , Shelah constructed a model of ZFC + CH in which there is a non-free Whitehead group.
Consider the ring A = R  of polynomials in three variables over the real numbers and its field of fractions  M = R ( x , y , z ).
The projective dimension of M as A -module is either 2 or 3, but it is independent of ZFC whether it is equal to 2; it is equal to 2 if and only if CH holds.
A direct product of countably many fields has global dimension 2 if and only if the continuum hypothesis holds.
Number theory  Further information: Number theory One can write down a concrete polynomial p ∈ Z  such that the statement "there are integers m 1 , ..., m 9 with p ( m 1 , ..., m 9 ) = 0" can neither be proven nor disproven in ZFC (assuming ZFC is consistent).
This follows from Yuri Matiyasevich 's resolution of Hilbert's tenth problem ; the polynomial is constructed so that it has an integer root if and only if ZFC is inconsistent.
Measure theory  Further information: Measure theory A stronger version of Fubini's theorem for positive functions, where the function is no longer assumed to be measurable but merely that the two iterated integrals are well defined and exist, is independent of ZFC.
On the one hand, CH implies that there exists a function on the unit square whose iterated integrals are not equal — the function is simply the indicator function of an ordering of  equivalent to a well ordering of the cardinal ω 1 .
A similar example can be constructed using MA .
On the other hand, the consistency of the strong Fubini theorem was first shown by Friedman .
It can also be deduced from a variant of Freiling's axiom of symmetry .
Topology  Further information: Topology The Normal Moore Space conjecture, namely that every normal  Moore space is metrizable , can be disproven assuming CH or MA + ¬CH, and can be proven assuming a certain axiom which implies the existence of large cardinals.
Thus, granted large cardinals, the Normal Moore Space conjecture is independent of ZFC.
Various assertions about     P  (  ω  )   /     {\displaystyle P(\omega )/}   finite, P-points, Q-points, ...
The existence of an S-space is independent of ZFC.
In particular, it is implied by the existence of a Suslin line.
Functional analysis  Further information: Functional analysis Garth Dales and Robert M.
Solovay proved in 1976 that Kaplansky's conjecture , namely that every algebra homomorphism from the Banach algebra  C(X) (where X is some compact  Hausdorff space ) into any other Banach algebra must be continuous, is independent of ZFC.
CH implies that for any infinite X there exists a discontinuous homomorphism into any Banach algebra.
Consider the algebra B ( H ) of bounded linear operators on the infinite-dimensional separable  Hilbert space  H .
The compact operators form a two-sided ideal in B ( H ).
The question of whether this ideal is the sum of two properly smaller ideals is independent of ZFC, as was proved by Andreas Blass and Saharon Shelah in 1987.
Charles Akemann and Nik Weaver showed in 2003 that the statement "there exists a counterexample to Naimark's problem which is generated by ℵ 1 , elements" is independent of ZFC.
Miroslav Bačák and Petr Hájek proved in 2008 that the statement "every Asplund space of density character ω 1 has a renorming with the Mazur intersection property " is independent of ZFC.
The result is shown using Martin's maximum axiom, while Mar Jiménez and José Pedro Moreno (1997) had presented a counterexample assuming CH.
As shown by Ilijas Farah  and N.
Christopher Phillips and Nik Weaver ,  the existence of outer automorphisms of the Calkin algebra depends on set theoretic assumptions beyond ZFC.
Wetzel's problem , which asks if every set of analytic functions which takes at most countably many distinct values at every point is necessarily countable, is true if and only if the continuum hypothesis is false.
Model theory  Further information: Model theory Chang's conjecture is independent of ZFC assuming the consistency of an Erdős cardinal .
Computability theory  Further information: Computability theory Marcia Groszek and Theodore Slaman gave examples of statements independent of ZFC concerning the structure of the Turing degrees.
In particular, whether there exists a maximally independent set of degrees of size less than continuum.
References    ^  Kunen, Kenneth (1980).
Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs .
ISBN  0-444-86839-9 .
^  Baumgartner, J., All      ℵ   1      {\displaystyle \aleph _{1}}   -dense sets of reals can be isomorphic, Fund.
79, pp.101 – 106, 1973   ^  Solovay, R.
M.; Tennenbaum, S.
(1971).
"Iterated Cohen extensions and Souslin's problem".
94 (2): 201–245.
doi : 10.2307/1970860 .
JSTOR  1970860 .
^  Baumgartner, J., J.
Malitz, and W.
Reiehart, Embedding trees in the rationals, Proc.
Natl.
Acad.
U.S.A., 67, pp.
1746 – 1753, 1970   ^  Shelah, S.
(1981).
"Free limits of forcing and more on Aronszajn trees" .
Israel Journal of Mathematics .
38 (4): 315–334.
doi : 10.1007/BF02762777 .
^  Devlin, K., and H.
Johnsbraten, The Souslin Problem, Lecture Notes on Mathematics 405, Springer, 1974   ^  Silver, J., The independence of Kurepa's conjecture and two-cardinal conjectures in model theory, in Axiomatic Set Theory, Proc.
Symp, in Pure Mathematics (13) pp.
383 – 390, 1967   ^  Shelah, S., Proper and Improper Forcing, Springer 1992   ^  Schlindwein, Chaz, Shelah's work on non-semiproper iterations I, Archive for Mathematical Logic (47) 2008 pp.
579 – 606   ^  Schlindwein, Chaz, Shelah's work on non-semiproper iterations II, Journal of Symbolic Logic (66) 2001, pp.
1865 – 1883   ^  Shelah, S.
(1974).
"Infinite Abelian groups, Whitehead problem and some constructions" .
18 (3): 243–256.
doi : 10.1007/BF02757281 .
MR  0357114 .
^  Shelah, S.
(1972).
"Whitehead groups may be not free, even assuming CH, I" .
28 (3): 193–204.
doi : 10.1007/BF02759809 .
^  Shelah, S.
(1980).
"Whitehead groups may not be free even assuming CH, II" .
35 (4): 257–285.
doi : 10.1007/BF02760652 .
^  Barbara L.
Osofsky (1968).
"Homological dimension and the continuum hypothesis"  (PDF) .
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society .
132 : 217–230.
doi : 10.1090/s0002-9947-1968-0224606-4 .
^  Barbara L.
Osofsky (1973).
Homological Dimensions of Modules .
American Mathematical Soc.
p.
60.
ISBN  978-0-8218-1662-2 .
^  See e.g.
: James P.
Jones (1980).
"Undecidable diophantine equations" .
Bull.
Amer.
Soc .
3 (2): 859–862.
doi : 10.1090/s0273-0979-1980-14832-6 .
Carl, M.; Moroz, B.
"On a Diophantine Representation of the Predicate of Provability".
Journal of Mathematical Sciences .
199 (199): 36–52.
doi : 10.1007/s10958-014-1830-2 .
hdl : 21.11116/0000-0004-1E89-1 .
S2CID  34618563 .
For a summary of the argument, see Hilbert's tenth problem § Applications .
^  Friedman, Harvey (1980).
"A Consistent Fubini-Tonelli Theorem for Nonmeasurable Functions" .
Illinois J.
Math .
24 (3): 390–395.
doi : 10.1215/ijm/1256047607 .
MR  0573474 .
^  Freiling, Chris (1986).
"Axioms of symmetry: throwing darts at the real number line".
Journal of Symbolic Logic .
51 (1): 190–200.
doi : 10.2307/2273955 .
JSTOR  2273955 .
MR  0830085 .
S2CID  38174418 .
^  Todorcevic, Stevo (1989).
Partition problems in topology .
Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society.
ISBN  978-0-8218-5091-6 .
^  H.
G.
Dales; W.
H.
Woodin (1987).
An introduction to independence for analysts .
^  Judith Roitman (1992).
"The Uses of Set Theory".
Mathematical Intelligencer .
14 (1).
^  Farah, Ilijas (2011).
"All automorphisms of the Calkin algebra are inner" .
173 (2): 619–661.
arXiv : 0705.3085 .
doi : 10.4007/annals.2011.173.2.1 .
^  Phillips, N.
C.; Weaver, N.
(2007).
"The Calkin algebra has outer automorphisms".
Duke Mathematical Journal .
139 (1): 185–202.
arXiv : math/0606594 .
doi : 10.1215/S0012-7094-07-13915-2 .
S2CID  13873756 .
^  Erdős, P.
(1964), "An interpolation problem associated with the continuum hypothesis" , The Michigan Mathematical Journal , 11 : 9–10, doi : 10.1307/mmj/1028999028 , MR  0168482 .
^  Groszek, Marcia J.
; Slaman, T.
(1983).
"Independence results on the global structure of the Turing degrees" .
277 (2): 579.
doi : 10.2307/1999225 .
JSTOR  1999225 .
External links  What are some reasonable-sounding statements that are independent of ZFC?
, mathoverflow.net v t e Mathematical logic General  Axiom  list  Cardinality  First-order logic  Formal proof  Formal semantics  Foundations of mathematics  Information theory  Lemma  Logical consequence  Model  Theorem  Theory  Type theory  Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes  Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems  Tarski's undefinability  Banach–Tarski paradox  Cantor's theorem,  paradox and diagonal argument  Compactness  Halting problem  Lindström's  Löwenheim–Skolem  Russell's paradox  Logics Traditional  Classical logic  Logical truth  Tautology  Proposition  Inference  Logical equivalence  Consistency  Equiconsistency  Argument  Soundness  Validity  Syllogism  Square of opposition  Venn diagram  Propositional  Boolean algebra  Boolean functions  Logical connectives  Propositional calculus  Propositional formula  Truth tables  Many-valued logic  3  finite  ∞  Predicate  First-order  list  Second-order  Monadic  Higher-order  Fixed-point  Free  Quantifiers  Predicate  Monadic predicate calculus  Set theory  Set  hereditary  Class  ( Ur- ) Element  Ordinal number  Extensionality  Forcing  Relation  equivalence  partition  Set operations: intersection  union  complement  Cartesian product  power set  identities  Types of sets  Countable  Uncountable  Empty  Inhabited  Singleton  Finite  Infinite  Transitive  Ultrafilter  Recursive  Fuzzy  Universal  Universe  constructible  Grothendieck  Von Neumann  Maps and cardinality  Function / Map  domain  codomain  image  In / Sur / Bi -jection  Schröder–Bernstein theorem  Isomorphism  Gödel numbering  Enumeration  Large cardinal  inaccessible  Aleph number  Operation  binary  Set theories  Zermelo–Fraenkel  axiom of choice  continuum hypothesis  General  Kripke–Platek  Morse–Kelley  Naive  New Foundations  Tarski–Grothendieck  Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel  Ackermann  Constructive  Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax  Alphabet  Arity  Automata  Axiom schema  Expression  ground  Extension  by definition  conservative  Relation  Formation rule  Grammar  Formula  atomic  closed  ground  open  Free/bound variable  Language  Metalanguage  Logical connective  ¬  ∨  ∧  →  ↔  =  Predicate  functional  variable  propositional variable  Proof  Quantifier  ∃  !
∀  rank  Sentence  atomic  spectrum  Signature  String  Substitution  Symbol  function  logical/constant  non-logical  variable  Term  Theory  list  Example axiomatic systems  ( list )  of arithmetic : Peano  second-order  elementary function  primitive recursive  Robinson  Skolem  of the real numbers  Tarski's axiomatization  of Boolean algebras  canonical  minimal axioms  of geometry : Euclidean : Elements  Hilbert's  Tarski's  non-Euclidean  Principia Mathematica  Proof theory  Formal proof  Natural deduction  Logical consequence  Rule of inference  Sequent calculus  Theorem  Systems  axiomatic  deductive  Hilbert  list  Complete theory  Independence ( from ZFC )  Proof of impossibility  Ordinal analysis  Reverse mathematics  Self-verifying theories  Model theory  Interpretation  function  of models  Model  equivalence  finite  saturated  spectrum  submodel  Non-standard model  of arithmetic  Diagram  elementary  Categorical theory  Model complete theory  Satisfiability  Semantics of logic  Strength  Theories of truth  semantic  Tarski's  Kripke's  T-schema  Transfer principle  Truth predicate  Truth value  Type  Ultraproduct  Validity  Computability theory  Church encoding  Church–Turing thesis  Computably enumerable  Computable function  Computable set  Decision problem  decidable  undecidable  P  NP  P versus NP problem  Kolmogorov complexity  Lambda calculus  Primitive recursive function  Recursion  Recursive set  Turing machine  Type theory  Related  Abstract logic  Algebraic logic  Automated theorem proving  Category theory  Concrete / Abstract category  Category of sets  History of logic  History of mathematical logic  timeline  Logicism  Mathematical object  Philosophy of mathematics  Supertask   Mathematics portal  Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_statements_independent_of_ZFC&oldid=1176948074 "Limitative results in mathematical logic  Gödel's incompleteness theorems are two theorems of mathematical logic that are concerned with the limits of provability in formal axiomatic theories.
These results, published by Kurt Gödel in 1931, are important both in mathematical logic and in the philosophy of mathematics .
The theorems are widely, but not universally, interpreted as showing that Hilbert's program to find a complete and consistent set of axioms for all mathematics is impossible.
The first incompleteness theorem states that no consistent system of axioms whose theorems can be listed by an effective procedure (i.e., an algorithm ) is capable of proving all truths about the arithmetic of natural numbers .
For any such consistent formal system, there will always be statements about natural numbers that are true, but that are unprovable within the system.
The second incompleteness theorem, an extension of the first, shows that the system cannot demonstrate its own consistency.
Employing a diagonal argument , Gödel's incompleteness theorems were the first of several closely related theorems on the limitations of formal systems.
They were followed by Tarski's undefinability theorem on the formal undefinability of truth, Church 's proof that Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem is unsolvable, and Turing 's theorem that there is no algorithm to solve the halting problem .
Formal systems: completeness, consistency, and effective axiomatization   The incompleteness theorems apply to formal systems that are of sufficient complexity to express the basic arithmetic of the natural numbers and which are consistent and effectively axiomatized.
Particularly in the context of first-order logic , formal systems are also called formal theories .
In general, a formal system is a deductive apparatus that consists of a particular set of axioms along with rules of symbolic manipulation (or rules of inference) that allow for the derivation of new theorems from the axioms.
One example of such a system is first-order Peano arithmetic , a system in which all variables are intended to denote natural numbers.
In other systems, such as set theory , only some sentences of the formal system express statements about the natural numbers.
The incompleteness theorems are about formal provability within these systems, rather than about "provability" in an informal sense.
There are several properties that a formal system may have, including completeness, consistency, and the existence of an effective axiomatization.
The incompleteness theorems show that systems which contain a sufficient amount of arithmetic cannot possess all three of these properties.
Effective axiomatization   A formal system is said to be effectively axiomatized (also called effectively generated ) if its set of theorems is recursively enumerable .
This means that there is a computer program that, in principle, could enumerate all the theorems of the system without listing any statements that are not theorems.
Examples of effectively generated theories include Peano arithmetic and Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC).
The theory known as true arithmetic consists of all true statements about the standard integers in the language of Peano arithmetic.
This theory is consistent and complete, and contains a sufficient amount of arithmetic.
However, it does not have a recursively enumerable set of axioms, and thus does not satisfy the hypotheses of the incompleteness theorems.
Completeness   A set of axioms is ( syntactically , or negation -) complete if, for any statement in the axioms' language, that statement or its negation is provable from the axioms.
This is the notion relevant for Gödel's first Incompleteness theorem.
It is not to be confused with semantic completeness, which means that the set of axioms proves all the semantic tautologies of the given language.
In his completeness theorem (not to be confused with the incompleteness theorems described here), Gödel proved that first-order logic is semantically complete.
But it is not syntactically complete, since there are sentences expressible in the language of first-order logic that can be neither proved nor disproved from the axioms of logic alone.
In a system of mathematics, thinkers such as Hilbert believed that it was just a matter of time to find such an axiomatization that would allow one to either prove or disprove (by proving its negation) every mathematical formula.
A formal system might be syntactically incomplete by design, as logics generally are.
Or it may be incomplete simply because not all the necessary axioms have been discovered or included.
For example, Euclidean geometry without the parallel postulate is incomplete, because some statements in the language (such as the parallel postulate itself) can not be proved from the remaining axioms.
Similarly, the theory of dense linear orders is not complete, but becomes complete with an extra axiom stating that there are no endpoints in the order.
The continuum hypothesis is a statement in the language of ZFC that is not provable within ZFC, so ZFC is not complete.
In this case, there is no obvious candidate for a new axiom that resolves the issue.
The theory of first-order Peano arithmetic seems consistent.
Assuming this is indeed the case, note that it has an infinite but recursively enumerable set of axioms, and can encode enough arithmetic for the hypotheses of the incompleteness theorem.
Thus by the first incompleteness theorem, Peano Arithmetic is not complete.
The theorem gives an explicit example of a statement of arithmetic that is neither provable nor disprovable in Peano's arithmetic.
Moreover, this statement is true in the usual model .
In addition, no effectively axiomatized, consistent extension of Peano arithmetic can be complete.
Consistency   A set of axioms is (simply) consistent if there is no statement such that both the statement and its negation are provable from the axioms, and inconsistent otherwise.
That is to say, a consistent axiomatic system is one that is free from contradiction.
Peano arithmetic is provably consistent from ZFC, but not from within itself.
Similarly, ZFC is not provably consistent from within itself, but ZFC + "there exists an inaccessible cardinal " proves ZFC is consistent because if κ is the least such cardinal, then V κ sitting inside the von Neumann universe is a model of ZFC, and a theory is consistent if and only if it has a model.
If one takes all statements in the language of Peano arithmetic as axioms, then this theory is complete, has a recursively enumerable set of axioms, and can describe addition and multiplication.
However, it is not consistent.
Additional examples of inconsistent theories arise from the paradoxes that result when the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension is assumed in set theory.
Systems which contain arithmetic   The incompleteness theorems apply only to formal systems which are able to prove a sufficient collection of facts about the natural numbers.
One sufficient collection is the set of theorems of Robinson arithmetic  Q .
Some systems, such as Peano arithmetic, can directly express statements about natural numbers.
Others, such as ZFC set theory, are able to interpret statements about natural numbers into their language.
Either of these options is appropriate for the incompleteness theorems.
The theory of algebraically closed fields of a given characteristic is complete, consistent, and has an infinite but recursively enumerable set of axioms.
However it is not possible to encode the integers into this theory, and the theory cannot describe arithmetic of integers.
A similar example is the theory of real closed fields , which is essentially equivalent to Tarski's axioms for Euclidean geometry .
So Euclidean geometry itself (in Tarski's formulation) is an example of a complete, consistent, effectively axiomatized theory.
The system of Presburger arithmetic consists of a set of axioms for the natural numbers with just the addition operation (multiplication is omitted).
Presburger arithmetic is complete, consistent, and recursively enumerable and can encode addition but not multiplication of natural numbers, showing that for Gödel's theorems one needs the theory to encode not just addition but also multiplication.
Dan Willard ( 2001 ) has studied some weak families of arithmetic systems which allow enough arithmetic as relations to formalise Gödel numbering, but which are not strong enough to have multiplication as a function, and so fail to prove the second incompleteness theorem; that is to say, these systems are consistent and capable of proving their own consistency (see self-verifying theories ).
Conflicting goals   In choosing a set of axioms, one goal is to be able to prove as many correct results as possible, without proving any incorrect results.
For example, we could imagine a set of true axioms which allow us to prove every true arithmetical claim about the natural numbers ( Smith 2007 , p.
2).
In the standard system of first-order logic, an inconsistent set of axioms will prove every statement in its language (this is sometimes called the principle of explosion ), and is thus automatically complete.
A set of axioms that is both complete and consistent, however, proves a maximal set of non- contradictory theorems.
The pattern illustrated in the previous sections with Peano arithmetic, ZFC, and ZFC + "there exists an inaccessible cardinal" cannot generally be broken.
Here ZFC + "there exists an inaccessible cardinal" cannot from itself, be proved consistent.
It is also not complete, as illustrated by the continuum hypothesis, which is unresolvable  in ZFC + "there exists an inaccessible cardinal".
The first incompleteness theorem shows that, in formal systems that can express basic arithmetic, a complete and consistent finite list of axioms can never be created: each time an additional, consistent statement is added as an axiom, there are other true statements that still cannot be proved, even with the new axiom.
If an axiom is ever added that makes the system complete, it does so at the cost of making the system inconsistent.
It is not even possible for an infinite list of axioms to be complete, consistent, and effectively axiomatized.
First incompleteness theorem   See also: Proof sketch for Gödel's first incompleteness theorem  Gödel's first incompleteness theorem first appeared as "Theorem VI" in Gödel's 1931 paper " On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I".
The hypotheses of the theorem were improved shortly thereafter by J.
Barkley Rosser ( 1936 ) using Rosser's trick .
The resulting theorem (incorporating Rosser's improvement) may be paraphrased in English as follows, where "formal system" includes the assumption that the system is effectively generated.
First Incompleteness Theorem : "Any consistent formal system F within which a certain amount of elementary arithmetic can be carried out is incomplete; i.e., there are statements of the language of F which can neither be proved nor disproved in F ."
(Raatikainen 2020)  The unprovable statement G F referred to by the theorem is often referred to as "the Gödel sentence" for the system F .
The proof constructs a particular Gödel sentence for the system F , but there are infinitely many statements in the language of the system that share the same properties, such as the conjunction of the Gödel sentence and any logically valid sentence.
Each effectively generated system has its own Gödel sentence.
It is possible to define a larger system F' that contains the whole of F plus G F as an additional axiom.
This will not result in a complete system, because Gödel's theorem will also apply to F' , and thus F' also cannot be complete.
In this case, G F is indeed a theorem in F' , because it is an axiom.
Because G F states only that it is not provable in F , no contradiction is presented by its provability within F' .
However, because the incompleteness theorem applies to F' , there will be a new Gödel statement G F ' for F' , showing that F' is also incomplete.
G F ' will differ from G F in that G F ' will refer to F' , rather than F .
Syntactic form of the Gödel sentence   The Gödel sentence is designed to refer, indirectly, to itself.
The sentence states that, when a particular sequence of steps is used to construct another sentence, that constructed sentence will not be provable in F .
However, the sequence of steps is such that the constructed sentence turns out to be G F itself.
In this way, the Gödel sentence G F indirectly states its own unprovability within F ( Smith 2007 , p.
135).
To prove the first incompleteness theorem, Gödel demonstrated that the notion of provability within a system could be expressed purely in terms of arithmetical functions that operate on Gödel numbers of sentences of the system.
Therefore, the system, which can prove certain facts about numbers, can also indirectly prove facts about its own statements, provided that it is effectively generated.
Questions about the provability of statements within the system are represented as questions about the arithmetical properties of numbers themselves, which would be decidable by the system if it were complete.
Thus, although the Gödel sentence refers indirectly to sentences of the system F , when read as an arithmetical statement the Gödel sentence directly refers only to natural numbers.
It asserts that no natural number has a particular property, where that property is given by a primitive recursive relation ( Smith 2007 , p.
141).
As such, the Gödel sentence can be written in the language of arithmetic with a simple syntactic form.
In particular, it can be expressed as a formula in the language of arithmetic consisting of a number of leading universal quantifiers followed by a quantifier-free body (these formulas are at level      Π   1    0      {\displaystyle \Pi _{1}^{0}}   of the arithmetical hierarchy ).
Via the MRDP theorem , the Gödel sentence can be re-written as a statement that a particular polynomial in many variables with integer coefficients never takes the value zero when integers are substituted for its variables ( Franzén 2005 , p.
71).
Truth of the Gödel sentence   The first incompleteness theorem shows that the Gödel sentence G F of an appropriate formal theory F is unprovable in F .
Because, when interpreted as a statement about arithmetic, this unprovability is exactly what the sentence (indirectly) asserts, the Gödel sentence is, in fact, true ( Smoryński 1977 , p.
825; also see Franzén 2005 , pp.
28–33).
For this reason, the sentence G F is often said to be "true but unprovable."
( Raatikainen 2020 ).
However, since the Gödel sentence cannot itself formally specify its intended interpretation, the truth of the sentence G F may only be arrived at via a meta-analysis from outside the system.
In general, this meta-analysis can be carried out within the weak formal system known as primitive recursive arithmetic , which proves the implication Con ( F )→ G F , where Con ( F ) is a canonical sentence asserting the consistency of F ( Smoryński 1977 , p.
840, Kikuchi & Tanaka 1994 , p.
403).
Although the Gödel sentence of a consistent theory is true as a statement about the intended interpretation of arithmetic, the Gödel sentence will be false in some nonstandard models of arithmetic , as a consequence of Gödel's completeness theorem ( Franzén 2005 , p.
135).
That theorem shows that, when a sentence is independent of a theory, the theory will have models in which the sentence is true and models in which the sentence is false.
As described earlier, the Gödel sentence of a system F is an arithmetical statement which claims that no number exists with a particular property.
The incompleteness theorem shows that this claim will be independent of the system F , and the truth of the Gödel sentence follows from the fact that no standard natural number has the property in question.
Any model in which the Gödel sentence is false must contain some element which satisfies the property within that model.
Such a model must be "nonstandard" – it must contain elements that do not correspond to any standard natural number ( Raatikainen 2020 , Franzén 2005 , p.
135).
Relationship with the liar paradox   Gödel specifically cites Richard's paradox and the liar paradox as semantical analogues to his syntactical incompleteness result in the introductory section of " On Formally Undecidable Propositions in Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I ".
The liar paradox is the sentence "This sentence is false."
An analysis of the liar sentence shows that it cannot be true (for then, as it asserts, it is false), nor can it be false (for then, it is true).
A Gödel sentence G for a system F makes a similar assertion to the liar sentence, but with truth replaced by provability: G says " G is not provable in the system F ."
The analysis of the truth and provability of G is a formalized version of the analysis of the truth of the liar sentence.
It is not possible to replace "not provable" with "false" in a Gödel sentence because the predicate " Q is the Gödel number of a false formula" cannot be represented as a formula of arithmetic.
This result, known as Tarski's undefinability theorem , was discovered independently both by Gödel, when he was working on the proof of the incompleteness theorem, and by the theorem's namesake, Alfred Tarski .
Extensions of Gödel's original result   Compared to the theorems stated in Gödel's 1931 paper, many contemporary statements of the incompleteness theorems are more general in two ways.
These generalized statements are phrased to apply to a broader class of systems, and they are phrased to incorporate weaker consistency assumptions.
Gödel demonstrated the incompleteness of the system of Principia Mathematica , a particular system of arithmetic, but a parallel demonstration could be given for any effective system of a certain expressiveness.
Gödel commented on this fact in the introduction to his paper, but restricted the proof to one system for concreteness.
In modern statements of the theorem, it is common to state the effectiveness and expressiveness conditions as hypotheses for the incompleteness theorem, so that it is not limited to any particular formal system.
The terminology used to state these conditions was not yet developed in 1931 when Gödel published his results.
Gödel's original statement and proof of the incompleteness theorem requires the assumption that the system is not just consistent but ω-consistent .
A system is ω-consistent if it is not ω-inconsistent, and is ω-inconsistent if there is a predicate P such that for every specific natural number m the system proves ~ P ( m ) , and yet the system also proves that there exists a natural number n such that P ( n ).
That is, the system says that a number with property P exists while denying that it has any specific value.
The ω-consistency of a system implies its consistency, but consistency does not imply ω-consistency.
J.
Barkley Rosser ( 1936 ) strengthened the incompleteness theorem by finding a variation of the proof ( Rosser's trick ) that only requires the system to be consistent, rather than ω-consistent.
This is mostly of technical interest, because all true formal theories of arithmetic (theories whose axioms are all true statements about natural numbers) are ω-consistent, and thus Gödel's theorem as originally stated applies to them.
The stronger version of the incompleteness theorem that only assumes consistency, rather than ω-consistency, is now commonly known as Gödel's incompleteness theorem and as the Gödel–Rosser theorem.
Second incompleteness theorem   For each formal system F containing basic arithmetic, it is possible to canonically define a formula Cons( F ) expressing the consistency of F .
This formula expresses the property that "there does not exist a natural number coding a formal derivation within the system F whose conclusion is a syntactic contradiction."
The syntactic contradiction is often taken to be "0=1", in which case Cons( F ) states "there is no natural number that codes a derivation of '0=1' from the axioms of F ."
Gödel's second incompleteness theorem shows that, under general assumptions, this canonical consistency statement Cons( F ) will not be provable in F .
The theorem first appeared as "Theorem XI" in Gödel's 1931 paper " On Formally Undecidable Propositions in Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I ".
In the following statement, the term "formalized system" also includes an assumption that F is effectively axiomatized.
This theorem states that for any consistent system F within which a certain amount of elementary arithmetic can be carried out, the consistency of F cannot be proved in F itself.
This theorem is stronger than the first incompleteness theorem because the statement constructed in the first incompleteness theorem does not directly express the consistency of the system.
The proof of the second incompleteness theorem is obtained by formalizing the proof of the first incompleteness theorem within the system F itself.
Expressing consistency   There is a technical subtlety in the second incompleteness theorem regarding the method of expressing the consistency of F as a formula in the language of F .
There are many ways to express the consistency of a system, and not all of them lead to the same result.
The formula Cons( F ) from the second incompleteness theorem is a particular expression of consistency.
Other formalizations of the claim that F is consistent may be inequivalent in F , and some may even be provable.
For example, first-order Peano arithmetic (PA) can prove that "the largest consistent subset of PA" is consistent.
But, because PA is consistent, the largest consistent subset of PA is just PA, so in this sense PA "proves that it is consistent".
What PA does not prove is that the largest consistent subset of PA is, in fact, the whole of PA.
(The term "largest consistent subset of PA" is meant here to be the largest consistent initial segment of the axioms of PA under some particular effective enumeration.)
The Hilbert–Bernays conditions   The standard proof of the second incompleteness theorem assumes that the provability predicate Prov A ( P ) satisfies the Hilbert–Bernays provability conditions .
Letting #( P ) represent the Gödel number of a formula P , the provability conditions say:  If F proves P , then F proves Prov A (#( P )) .
F proves 1.; that is, F proves Prov A (#( P )) → Prov A (#( Prov A (#( P )))) .
F proves Prov A (#( P → Q )) ∧ Prov A (#( P )) → Prov A (#( Q )) (analogue of modus ponens ).
There are systems, such as Robinson arithmetic, which are strong enough to meet the assumptions of the first incompleteness theorem, but which do not prove the Hilbert–Bernays conditions.
Peano arithmetic, however, is strong enough to verify these conditions, as are all theories stronger than Peano arithmetic.
Implications for consistency proofs   Gödel's second incompleteness theorem also implies that a system F 1 satisfying the technical conditions outlined above cannot prove the consistency of any system F 2 that proves the consistency of F 1 .
This is because such a system F 1 can prove that if F 2 proves the consistency of F 1 , then F 1 is in fact consistent.
For the claim that F 1 is consistent has form "for all numbers n , n has the decidable property of not being a code for a proof of contradiction in F 1 ".
If F 1 were in fact inconsistent, then F 2 would prove for some n that n is the code of a contradiction in F 1 .
But if F 2 also proved that F 1 is consistent (that is, that there is no such n ), then it would itself be inconsistent.
This reasoning can be formalized in F 1 to show that if F 2 is consistent, then F 1 is consistent.
Since, by second incompleteness theorem, F 1 does not prove its consistency, it cannot prove the consistency of F 2 either.
This corollary of the second incompleteness theorem shows that there is no hope of proving, for example, the consistency of Peano arithmetic using any finitistic means that can be formalized in a system the consistency of which is provable in Peano arithmetic (PA).
For example, the system of primitive recursive arithmetic (PRA), which is widely accepted as an accurate formalization of finitistic mathematics, is provably consistent in PA.
Thus PRA cannot prove the consistency of PA.
This fact is generally seen to imply that Hilbert's program , which aimed to justify the use of "ideal" (infinitistic) mathematical principles in the proofs of "real" (finitistic) mathematical statements by giving a finitistic proof that the ideal principles are consistent, cannot be carried out.
The corollary also indicates the epistemological relevance of the second incompleteness theorem.
It would provide no interesting information if a system F proved its consistency.
This is because inconsistent theories prove everything, including their consistency.
Thus a consistency proof of F in F would give us no clue as to whether F is consistent; no doubts about the consistency of F would be resolved by such a consistency proof.
The interest in consistency proofs lies in the possibility of proving the consistency of a system F in some system F' that is in some sense less doubtful than F itself, for example, weaker than F .
For many naturally occurring theories F and F' , such as F = Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory and F' = primitive recursive arithmetic, the consistency of F' is provable in F , and thus F' cannot prove the consistency of F by the above corollary of the second incompleteness theorem.
The second incompleteness theorem does not rule out altogether the possibility of proving the consistency of some theory T , only doing so in a theory that T itself can prove to be consistent.
For example, Gerhard Gentzen proved the consistency of Peano arithmetic in a different system that includes an axiom asserting that the ordinal called ε 0 is wellfounded ; see Gentzen's consistency proof .
Gentzen's theorem spurred the development of ordinal analysis in proof theory.
Examples of undecidable statements   See also: List of statements independent of ZFC  There are two distinct senses of the word "undecidable" in mathematics and computer science.
The first of these is the proof-theoretic sense used in relation to Gödel's theorems, that of a statement being neither provable nor refutable in a specified deductive system .
The second sense, which will not be discussed here, is used in relation to computability theory and applies not to statements but to decision problems , which are countably infinite sets of questions each requiring a yes or no answer.
Such a problem is said to be undecidable if there is no computable function that correctly answers every question in the problem set (see undecidable problem ).
Because of the two meanings of the word undecidable, the term independent is sometimes used instead of undecidable for the "neither provable nor refutable" sense.
Undecidability of a statement in a particular deductive system does not, in and of itself, address the question of whether the truth value of the statement is well-defined, or whether it can be determined by other means.
Undecidability only implies that the particular deductive system being considered does not prove the truth or falsity of the statement.
Whether there exist so-called "absolutely undecidable" statements, whose truth value can never be known or is ill-specified, is a controversial point in the philosophy of mathematics .
The combined work of Gödel and Paul Cohen has given two concrete examples of undecidable statements (in the first sense of the term): The continuum hypothesis can neither be proved nor refuted in ZFC (the standard axiomatization of set theory ), and the axiom of choice can neither be proved nor refuted in ZF (which is all the ZFC axioms except the axiom of choice).
These results do not require the incompleteness theorem.
Gödel proved in 1940 that neither of these statements could be disproved in ZF or ZFC set theory.
In the 1960s, Cohen proved that neither is provable from ZF, and the continuum hypothesis cannot be proved from ZFC.
Shelah (1974) showed that the Whitehead problem in group theory is undecidable, in the first sense of the term, in standard set theory.
Gregory Chaitin produced undecidable statements in algorithmic information theory and proved another incompleteness theorem in that setting.
Chaitin's incompleteness theorem states that for any system that can represent enough arithmetic, there is an upper bound c such that no specific number can be proved in that system to have Kolmogorov complexity greater than c .
While Gödel's theorem is related to the liar paradox , Chaitin's result is related to Berry's paradox .
Undecidable statements provable in larger systems   These are natural mathematical equivalents of the Gödel "true but undecidable" sentence.
They can be proved in a larger system which is generally accepted as a valid form of reasoning, but are undecidable in a more limited system such as Peano Arithmetic.
In 1977, Paris and Harrington proved that the Paris–Harrington principle , a version of the infinite Ramsey theorem , is undecidable in (first-order) Peano arithmetic , but can be proved in the stronger system of second-order arithmetic .
Kirby and Paris later showed that Goodstein's theorem , a statement about sequences of natural numbers somewhat simpler than the Paris–Harrington principle, is also undecidable in Peano arithmetic.
Kruskal's tree theorem , which has applications in computer science, is also undecidable from Peano arithmetic but provable in set theory.
In fact Kruskal's tree theorem (or its finite form) is undecidable in a much stronger system ATR 0 codifying the principles acceptable based on a philosophy of mathematics called predicativism .
The related but more general graph minor theorem (2003) has consequences for computational complexity theory .
Relationship with computability   See also: Halting problem § Gödel's incompleteness theorems  The incompleteness theorem is closely related to several results about undecidable sets in recursion theory .
Kleene (1943) presented a proof of Gödel's incompleteness theorem using basic results of computability theory.
One such result shows that the halting problem is undecidable: no computer program can correctly determine, given any program P as input, whether P eventually halts when run with a particular given input.
Kleene showed that the existence of a complete effective system of arithmetic with certain consistency properties would force the halting problem to be decidable, a contradiction.
This method of proof has also been presented by Shoenfield (1967) ; Charlesworth (1981) ; and Hopcroft & Ullman (1979) .
Franzén (2005) explains how Matiyasevich's solution to Hilbert's 10th problem can be used to obtain a proof to Gödel's first incompleteness theorem.
Matiyasevich proved that there is no algorithm that, given a multivariate polynomial p ( x 1 , x 2 ,..., x k ) with integer coefficients, determines whether there is an integer solution to the equation p = 0.
Because polynomials with integer coefficients, and integers themselves, are directly expressible in the language of arithmetic, if a multivariate integer polynomial equation p = 0 does have a solution in the integers then any sufficiently strong system of arithmetic T will prove this.
Moreover, suppose the system T is ω-consistent.
In that case, it will never prove that a particular polynomial equation has a solution when there is no solution in the integers.
Thus, if T were complete and ω-consistent, it would be possible to determine algorithmically whether a polynomial equation has a solution by merely enumerating proofs of T until either " p has a solution" or " p has no solution" is found, in contradiction to Matiyasevich's theorem.
Hence it follows that T cannot be ω-consistent and complete.
Moreover, for each consistent effectively generated system T , it is possible to effectively generate a multivariate polynomial p over the integers such that the equation p = 0 has no solutions over the integers, but the lack of solutions cannot be proved in T .
Smoryński (1977) shows how the existence of recursively inseparable sets can be used to prove the first incompleteness theorem.
This proof is often extended to show that systems such as Peano arithmetic are essentially undecidable .
Chaitin's incompleteness theorem gives a different method of producing independent sentences, based on Kolmogorov complexity .
Like the proof presented by Kleene that was mentioned above, Chaitin's theorem only applies to theories with the additional property that all their axioms are true in the standard model of the natural numbers.
Gödel's incompleteness theorem is distinguished by its applicability to consistent theories that nonetheless include false statements in the standard model; these theories are known as ω-inconsistent .
Proof sketch for the first theorem   Main article: Proof sketch for Gödel's first incompleteness theorem  The proof by contradiction has three essential parts.
To begin, choose a formal system that meets the proposed criteria:  Statements in the system can be represented by natural numbers (known as Gödel numbers).
The significance of this is that properties of statements—such as their truth and falsehood—will be equivalent to determining whether their Gödel numbers have certain properties, and that properties of the statements can therefore be demonstrated by examining their Gödel numbers.
This part culminates in the construction of a formula expressing the idea that "statement S is provable in the system" (which can be applied to any statement " S " in the system).
In the formal system it is possible to construct a number whose matching statement, when interpreted, is self-referential and essentially says that it (i.e.
the statement itself) is unprovable.
This is done using a technique called " diagonalization " (so-called because of its origins as Cantor's diagonal argument ).
Within the formal system this statement permits a demonstration that it is neither provable nor disprovable in the system, and therefore the system cannot in fact be ω-consistent.
Hence the original assumption that the proposed system met the criteria is false.
Arithmetization of syntax   The main problem in fleshing out the proof described above is that it seems at first that to construct a statement p that is equivalent to " p cannot be proved", p would somehow have to contain a reference to p , which could easily give rise to an infinite regress.
Gödel's technique is to show that statements can be matched with numbers (often called the arithmetization of syntax ) in such a way that "proving a statement" can be replaced with "testing whether a number has a given property" .
This allows a self-referential formula to be constructed in a way that avoids any infinite regress of definitions.
The same technique was later used by Alan Turing in his work on the Entscheidungsproblem .
In simple terms, a method can be devised so that every formula or statement that can be formulated in the system gets a unique number, called its Gödel number , in such a way that it is possible to mechanically convert back and forth between formulas and Gödel numbers.
The numbers involved might be very long indeed (in terms of number of digits), but this is not a barrier; all that matters is that such numbers can be constructed.
A simple example is how English can be stored as a sequence of numbers for each letter and then combined into a single larger number:  The word hello is encoded as 104-101-108-108-111 in ASCII , which can be converted into the number 104101108108111.
The logical statement x=y => y=x is encoded as 120-061-121-032-061-062-032-121-061-120 in ASCII , which can be converted into the number 120061121032061062032121061120.
In principle, proving a statement true or false can be shown to be equivalent to proving that the number matching the statement does or does not have a given property.
Because the formal system is strong enough to support reasoning about numbers in general , it can support reasoning about numbers that represent formulae and statements as well.
Crucially, because the system can support reasoning about properties of numbers , the results are equivalent to reasoning about provability of their equivalent statements .
Construction of a statement about "provability"   "Bew" redirects here.
For other uses, see Bew (disambiguation) .
Having shown that in principle the system can indirectly make statements about provability, by analyzing properties of those numbers representing statements it is now possible to show how to create a statement that actually does this.
A formula F ( x ) that contains exactly one free variable x is called a statement form or class-sign .
As soon as x is replaced by a specific number, the statement form turns into a bona fide statement, and it is then either provable in the system, or not.
For certain formulas one can show that for every natural number n ,     F  (  n  )    {\displaystyle F(n)}   is true if and only if it can be proved (the precise requirement in the original proof is weaker, but for the proof sketch this will suffice).
In particular, this is true for every specific arithmetic operation between a finite number of natural numbers, such as "2 × 3 = 6".
Statement forms themselves are not statements and therefore cannot be proved or disproved.
But every statement form F ( x ) can be assigned a Gödel number denoted by G ( F ) .
The choice of the free variable used in the form F ( x ) is not relevant to the assignment of the Gödel number G ( F ) .
The notion of provability itself can also be encoded by Gödel numbers, in the following way: since a proof is a list of statements which obey certain rules, the Gödel number of a proof can be defined.
Now, for every statement p , one may ask whether a number x is the Gödel number of its proof.
The relation between the Gödel number of p and x , the potential Gödel number of its proof, is an arithmetical relation between two numbers.
Therefore, there is a statement form Bew ( y ) that uses this arithmetical relation to state that a Gödel number of a proof of y exists:  Bew ( y ) = ∃ x ( y is the Gödel number of a formula and x is the Gödel number of a proof of the formula encoded by y ).
The name Bew is short for beweisbar , the German word for "provable"; this name was originally used by Gödel to denote the provability formula just described.
Note that " Bew ( y ) " is merely an abbreviation that represents a particular, very long, formula in the original language of T ; the string " Bew " itself is not claimed to be part of this language.
An important feature of the formula Bew ( y ) is that if a statement p is provable in the system then Bew ( G ( p )) is also provable.
This is because any proof of p would have a corresponding Gödel number, the existence of which causes Bew( G ( p )) to be satisfied.
Diagonalization   The next step in the proof is to obtain a statement which, indirectly, asserts its own unprovability.
Although Gödel constructed this statement directly, the existence of at least one such statement follows from the diagonal lemma , which says that for any sufficiently strong formal system and any statement form F there is a statement p such that the system proves  p ↔ F ( G ( p )) .
By letting F be the negation of Bew ( x ) , we obtain the theorem  p ↔ ~ Bew ( G ( p ))  and the p defined by this roughly states that its own Gödel number is the Gödel number of an unprovable formula.
The statement p is not literally equal to ~ Bew ( G ( p )) ; rather, p states that if a certain calculation is performed, the resulting Gödel number will be that of an unprovable statement.
But when this calculation is performed, the resulting Gödel number turns out to be the Gödel number of p itself.
This is similar to the following sentence in English:  ", when preceded by itself in quotes, is unprovable.
", when preceded by itself in quotes, is unprovable.
This sentence does not directly refer to itself, but when the stated transformation is made the original sentence is obtained as a result, and thus this sentence indirectly asserts its own unprovability.
The proof of the diagonal lemma employs a similar method.
Now, assume that the axiomatic system is ω-consistent , and let p be the statement obtained in the previous section.
If p were provable, then Bew ( G ( p )) would be provable, as argued above.
But p asserts the negation of Bew ( G ( p )) .
Thus the system would be inconsistent, proving both a statement and its negation.
This contradiction shows that p cannot be provable.
If the negation of p were provable, then Bew ( G ( p )) would be provable (because p was constructed to be equivalent to the negation of Bew ( G ( p )) ).
However, for each specific number x , x cannot be the Gödel number of the proof of p , because p is not provable (from the previous paragraph).
Thus on one hand the system proves there is a number with a certain property (that it is the Gödel number of the proof of p ), but on the other hand, for every specific number x , we can prove that it does not have this property.
This is impossible in an ω-consistent system.
Thus the negation of p is not provable.
Thus the statement p is undecidable in our axiomatic system: it can neither be proved nor disproved within the system.
In fact, to show that p is not provable only requires the assumption that the system is consistent.
The stronger assumption of ω-consistency is required to show that the negation of p is not provable.
Thus, if p is constructed for a particular system:  If the system is ω-consistent, it can prove neither p nor its negation, and so p is undecidable.
If the system is consistent, it may have the same situation, or it may prove the negation of p .
In the later case, we have a statement ("not p ") which is false but provable, and the system is not ω-consistent.
If one tries to "add the missing axioms" to avoid the incompleteness of the system, then one has to add either p or "not p " as axioms.
But then the definition of "being a Gödel number of a proof" of a statement changes.
which means that the formula Bew ( x ) is now different.
Thus when we apply the diagonal lemma to this new Bew, we obtain a new statement p , different from the previous one, which will be undecidable in the new system if it is ω-consistent.
Proof via Berry's paradox   Boolos (1989) sketches an alternative proof of the first incompleteness theorem that uses Berry's paradox rather than the liar paradox to construct a true but unprovable formula.
A similar proof method was independently discovered by Saul Kripke .
Boolos's proof proceeds by constructing, for any computably enumerable set S of true sentences of arithmetic, another sentence which is true but not contained in S .
This gives the first incompleteness theorem as a corollary.
According to Boolos, this proof is interesting because it provides a "different sort of reason" for the incompleteness of effective, consistent theories of arithmetic.
Computer verified proofs   See also: Automated theorem proving  The incompleteness theorems are among a relatively small number of nontrivial theorems that have been transformed into formalized theorems that can be completely verified by proof assistant software.
Gödel's original proofs of the incompleteness theorems, like most mathematical proofs, were written in natural language intended for human readers.
Computer-verified proofs of versions of the first incompleteness theorem were announced by Natarajan Shankar in 1986 using Nqthm ( Shankar 1994 ), by Russell O'Connor in 2003 using Coq ( O'Connor 2005 ) and by John Harrison in 2009 using HOL Light ( Harrison 2009 ).
A computer-verified proof of both incompleteness theorems was announced by Lawrence Paulson in 2013 using Isabelle ( Paulson 2014 ).
Proof sketch for the second theorem   See also: Hilbert–Bernays provability conditions  The main difficulty in proving the second incompleteness theorem is to show that various facts about provability used in the proof of the first incompleteness theorem can be formalized within a system S using a formal predicate P for provability.
Once this is done, the second incompleteness theorem follows by formalizing the entire proof of the first incompleteness theorem within the system S itself.
Let p stand for the undecidable sentence constructed above, and assume for purposes of obtaining a contradiction that the consistency of the system S can be proved from within the system S itself.
This is equivalent to proving the statement "System S is consistent".
Now consider the statement c , where c = "If the system S is consistent, then p is not provable".
The proof of sentence c can be formalized within the system S , and therefore the statement c , " p is not provable", (or identically, "not P ( p ) ") can be proved in the system S .
Observe then, that if we can prove that the system S is consistent (ie.
the statement in the hypothesis of c ), then we have proved that p is not provable.
But this is a contradiction since by the 1st Incompleteness Theorem, this sentence (ie.
what is implied in the sentence c , "" p " is not provable") is what we construct to be unprovable.
Notice that this is why we require formalizing the first Incompleteness Theorem in S : to prove the 2nd Incompleteness Theorem, we obtain a contradiction with the 1st Incompleteness Theorem which can do only by showing that the theorem holds in S .
So we cannot prove that the system S is consistent.
And the 2nd Incompleteness Theorem statement follows.
Discussion and implications   The incompleteness results affect the philosophy of mathematics , particularly versions of formalism , which use a single system of formal logic to define their principles.
Consequences for logicism and Hilbert's second problem   The incompleteness theorem is sometimes thought to have severe consequences for the program of logicism proposed by Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell , which aimed to define the natural numbers in terms of logic.
Bob Hale and Crispin Wright argue that it is not a problem for logicism because the incompleteness theorems apply equally to first-order logic as they do to arithmetic.
They argue that only those who believe that the natural numbers are to be defined in terms of first order logic have this problem.
Many logicians believe that Gödel's incompleteness theorems struck a fatal blow to David Hilbert 's second problem , which asked for a finitary consistency proof for mathematics.
The second incompleteness theorem, in particular, is often viewed as making the problem impossible.
Not all mathematicians agree with this analysis, however, and the status of Hilbert's second problem is not yet decided (see " Modern viewpoints on the status of the problem ").
Minds and machines   Main article: Mechanism (philosophy) § Gödelian arguments  Authors including the philosopher J.
R.
Lucas and physicist Roger Penrose have debated what, if anything, Gödel's incompleteness theorems imply about human intelligence.
Much of the debate centers on whether the human mind is equivalent to a Turing machine , or by the Church–Turing thesis , any finite machine at all.
If it is, and if the machine is consistent, then Gödel's incompleteness theorems would apply to it.
Putnam (1960) suggested that while Gödel's theorems cannot be applied to humans, since they make mistakes and are therefore inconsistent, it may be applied to the human faculty of science or mathematics in general.
Assuming that it is consistent, either its consistency cannot be proved or it cannot be represented by a Turing machine.
Wigderson (2010) has proposed that the concept of mathematical "knowability" should be based on computational complexity rather than logical decidability.
He writes that "when knowability is interpreted by modern standards, namely via computational complexity, the Gödel phenomena are very much with us."
Douglas Hofstadter , in his books Gödel, Escher, Bach and I Am a Strange Loop , cites Gödel's theorems as an example of what he calls a strange loop , a hierarchical, self-referential structure existing within an axiomatic formal system.
He argues that this is the same kind of structure that gives rise to consciousness, the sense of "I", in the human mind.
While the self-reference in Gödel's theorem comes from the Gödel sentence asserting its unprovability within the formal system of Principia Mathematica, the self-reference in the human mind comes from how the brain abstracts and categorises stimuli into "symbols", or groups of neurons which respond to concepts, in what is effectively also a formal system, eventually giving rise to symbols modeling the concept of the very entity doing the perception.
Hofstadter argues that a strange loop in a sufficiently complex formal system can give rise to a "downward" or "upside-down" causality, a situation in which the normal hierarchy of cause-and-effect is flipped upside-down.
In the case of Gödel's theorem, this manifests, in short, as the following:  Merely from knowing the formula's meaning, one can infer its truth or falsity without any effort to derive it in the old-fashioned way, which requires one to trudge methodically "upwards" from the axioms.
This is not just peculiar; it is astonishing.
Normally, one cannot merely look at what a mathematical conjecture says and simply appeal to the content of that statement on its own to deduce whether the statement is true or false.
In the case of the mind, a far more complex formal system, this "downward causality" manifests, in Hofstadter's view, as the ineffable human instinct that the causality of our minds lies on the high level of desires, concepts, personalities, thoughts, and ideas, rather than on the low level of interactions between neurons or even fundamental particles, even though according to physics the latter seems to possess the causal power.
There is thus a curious upside-downness to our normal human way of perceiving the world: we are built to perceive “big stuff” rather than “small stuff”, even though the domain of the tiny seems to be where the actual motors driving reality reside.
Paraconsistent logic   Although Gödel's theorems are usually studied in the context of classical logic, they also have a role in the study of paraconsistent logic and of inherently contradictory statements ( dialetheia ).
Priest ( 1984 , 2006 ) argues that replacing the notion of formal proof in Gödel's theorem with the usual notion of informal proof can be used to show that naive mathematics is inconsistent, and uses this as evidence for dialetheism .
The cause of this inconsistency is the inclusion of a truth predicate for a system within the language of the system.
Shapiro (2002) gives a more mixed appraisal of the applications of Gödel's theorems to dialetheism.
Appeals to the incompleteness theorems in other fields   Appeals and analogies are sometimes made to the incompleteness of theorems in support of arguments that go beyond mathematics and logic.
Several authors have commented negatively on such extensions and interpretations, including Franzén (2005) , Raatikainen (2005) , Sokal & Bricmont (1999) ; and Stangroom & Benson (2006) .
Sokal & Bricmont (1999) and Stangroom & Benson (2006) , for example, quote from Rebecca Goldstein 's comments on the disparity between Gödel's avowed Platonism and the anti-realist uses to which his ideas are sometimes put.
Sokal & Bricmont (1999) criticize Régis Debray 's invocation of the theorem in the context of sociology; Debray has defended this use as metaphorical (ibid.).
History   After Gödel published his proof of the completeness theorem as his doctoral thesis in 1929, he turned to a second problem for his habilitation .
His original goal was to obtain a positive solution to Hilbert's second problem .
At the time, theories of natural numbers and real numbers similar to second-order arithmetic were known as "analysis", while theories of natural numbers alone were known as "arithmetic".
Gödel was not the only person working on the consistency problem.
Ackermann had published a flawed consistency proof for analysis in 1925, in which he attempted to use the method of ε-substitution originally developed by Hilbert.
Later that year, von Neumann was able to correct the proof for a system of arithmetic without any axioms of induction.
By 1928, Ackermann had communicated a modified proof to Bernays; this modified proof led Hilbert to announce his belief in 1929 that the consistency of arithmetic had been demonstrated and that a consistent proof of analysis would likely soon follow.
After the publication of the incompleteness theorems showed that Ackermann's modified proof must be erroneous, von Neumann produced a concrete example showing that its main technique was unsound.
In the course of his research, Gödel discovered that although a sentence, asserting its falsehood leads to paradox, a sentence that asserts its non-provability does not.
In particular, Gödel was aware of the result now called Tarski's indefinability theorem , although he never published it.
Gödel announced his first incompleteness theorem to Carnap, Feigel, and Waismann on August 26, 1930; all four would attend the Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences , a key conference in Königsberg the following week.
Announcement   The 1930 Königsberg conference was a joint meeting of three academic societies, with many of the key logicians of the time in attendance.
Carnap, Heyting, and von Neumann delivered one-hour addresses on the mathematical philosophies of logicism, intuitionism, and formalism, respectively.
The conference also included Hilbert's retirement address, as he was leaving his position at the University of Göttingen.
Hilbert used the speech to argue his belief that all mathematical problems can be solved.
He ended his address by saying,  For the mathematician there is no Ignorabimus , and, in my opinion, not at all for natural science either.
The true reason why  has succeeded in finding an unsolvable problem is, in my opinion, that there is no unsolvable problem.
In contrast to the foolish Ignorabimus , our credo avers: We must know.
We shall know!
This speech quickly became known as a summary of Hilbert's beliefs on mathematics (its final six words, " Wir müssen wissen.
Wir werden wissen!
", were used as Hilbert's epitaph in 1943).
Although Gödel was likely in attendance for Hilbert's address, the two never met face to face.
Gödel announced his first incompleteness theorem at a roundtable discussion session on the third day of the conference.
The announcement drew little attention apart from that of von Neumann, who pulled Gödel aside for a conversation.
Later that year, working independently with knowledge of the first incompleteness theorem, von Neumann obtained a proof of the second incompleteness theorem, which he announced to Gödel in a letter dated November 20, 1930.
Gödel had independently obtained the second incompleteness theorem and included it in his submitted manuscript, which was received by Monatshefte für Mathematik on November 17, 1930.
Gödel's paper was published in the Monatshefte in 1931 under the title "Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme I" (" On Formally Undecidable Propositions in Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I ").
As the title implies, Gödel originally planned to publish a second part of the paper in the next volume of the Monatshefte ; the prompt acceptance of the first paper was one reason he changed his plans.
Generalization and acceptance   Gödel gave a series of lectures on his theorems at Princeton in 1933–1934 to an audience that included Church, Kleene, and Rosser.
By this time, Gödel had grasped that the key property his theorems required is that the system must be effective (at the time, the term "general recursive" was used).
Rosser proved in 1936 that the hypothesis of ω-consistency, which was an integral part of Gödel's original proof, could be replaced by simple consistency if the Gödel sentence was changed appropriately.
These developments left the incompleteness theorems in essentially their modern form.
Gentzen published his consistency proof for first-order arithmetic in 1936.
Hilbert accepted this proof as "finitary" although (as Gödel's theorem had already shown) it cannot be formalized within the system of arithmetic that is being proved consistent.
The impact of the incompleteness theorems on Hilbert's program was quickly realized.
Bernays included a full proof of the incompleteness theorems in the second volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik ( 1939 ), along with additional results of Ackermann on the ε-substitution method and Gentzen's consistency proof of arithmetic.
This was the first full published proof of the second incompleteness theorem.
Criticisms   Finsler   Finsler (1926) used a version of Richard's paradox to construct an expression that was false but unprovable in a particular, informal framework he had developed.
Gödel was unaware of this paper when he proved the incompleteness theorems (Collected Works Vol.
IV., p.
9).
Finsler wrote to Gödel in 1931 to inform him about this paper, which Finsler felt had priority for an incompleteness theorem.
Finsler's methods did not rely on formalized provability and had only a superficial resemblance to Gödel's work.
Gödel read the paper but found it deeply flawed, and his response to Finsler laid out concerns about the lack of formalization.
Finsler continued to argue for his philosophy of mathematics, which eschewed formalization, for the remainder of his career.
Zermelo   In September 1931, Ernst Zermelo wrote to Gödel to announce what he described as an "essential gap" in Gödel's argument.
In October, Gödel replied with a 10-page letter, where he pointed out that Zermelo mistakenly assumed that the notion of truth in a system is definable in that system; it is not true in general by Tarski's undefinability theorem .
However, Zermelo did not relent and published his criticisms in print with "a rather scathing paragraph on his young competitor".
Gödel decided that pursuing the matter further was pointless, and Carnap agreed.
Much of Zermelo's subsequent work was related to logic stronger than first-order logic, with which he hoped to show both the consistency and categoricity of mathematical theories.
Wittgenstein   Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote several passages about the incompleteness theorems that were published posthumously in his 1953 Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics , particularly, one section sometimes called the "notorious paragraph" where he seems to confuse the notions of "true" and "provable" in Russell's system.
Gödel was a member of the Vienna Circle during the period in which Wittgenstein's early ideal language philosophy and Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus dominated the circle's thinking.
There has been some controversy about whether Wittgenstein misunderstood the incompleteness theorem or just expressed himself unclearly.
Writings in Gödel's Nachlass express the belief that Wittgenstein misread his ideas.
Multiple commentators have read Wittgenstein as misunderstanding Gödel , although Floyd & Putnam (2000) as well as Priest (2004) have provided textual readings arguing that most commentary misunderstands Wittgenstein.
On their release, Bernays, Dummett, and Kreisel wrote separate reviews on Wittgenstein's remarks, all of which were extremely negative.
The unanimity of this criticism caused Wittgenstein's remarks on the incompleteness theorems to have little impact on the logic community.
In 1972, Gödel stated: "Has Wittgenstein lost his mind?
Does he mean it seriously?
He intentionally utters trivially nonsensical statements", and wrote to Karl Menger that Wittgenstein's comments demonstrate a misunderstanding of the incompleteness theorems writing:  It is clear from the passages you cite that Wittgenstein did not understand  (or pretended not to understand it).
He interpreted it as a kind of logical paradox, while in fact is just the opposite, namely a mathematical theorem within an absolutely uncontroversial part of mathematics (finitary number theory or combinatorics).
Since the publication of Wittgenstein's Nachlass in 2000, a series of papers in philosophy have sought to evaluate whether the original criticism of Wittgenstein's remarks was justified.
Floyd & Putnam (2000) argue that Wittgenstein had a more complete understanding of the incompleteness theorem than was previously assumed.
They are particularly concerned with the interpretation of a Gödel sentence for an ω-inconsistent system as saying "I am not provable", since the system has no models in which the provability predicate corresponds to actual provability.
Rodych (2003) argues that their interpretation of Wittgenstein is not historically justified.
Berto (2009) explores the relationship between Wittgenstein's writing and theories of paraconsistent logic.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "For the mathematical journal of the same name, see Experimental Mathematics (journal) .
Experimental mathematics is an approach to mathematics in which computation is used to investigate mathematical objects and identify properties and patterns.
It has been defined as "that branch of mathematics that concerns itself ultimately with the codification and transmission of insights within the mathematical community through the use of experimental (in either the Galilean, Baconian, Aristotelian or Kantian sense) exploration of conjectures and more informal beliefs and a careful analysis of the data acquired in this pursuit."
As expressed by Paul Halmos : "Mathematics is not a deductive science —that's a cliché.
When you try to prove a theorem, you don't just list the hypotheses , and then start to reason.
What you do is trial and error , experimentation, guesswork.
You want to find out what the facts are, and what you do is in that respect similar to what a laboratory technician does."
History   Mathematicians have always practiced experimental mathematics.
Existing records of early mathematics, such as Babylonian mathematics , typically consist of lists of numerical examples illustrating algebraic identities.
However, modern mathematics, beginning in the 17th century, developed a tradition of publishing results in a final, formal and abstract presentation.
The numerical examples that may have led a mathematician to originally formulate a general theorem were not published, and were generally forgotten.
Experimental mathematics as a separate area of study re-emerged in the twentieth century, when the invention of the electronic computer vastly increased the range of feasible calculations, with a speed and precision far greater than anything available to previous generations of mathematicians.
A significant milestone and achievement of experimental mathematics was the discovery in 1995 of the Bailey–Borwein–Plouffe formula for the binary digits of π .
This formula was discovered not by formal reasoning, but instead
by numerical searches on a computer; only afterwards was a rigorous proof found.
Objectives and uses   The objectives of experimental mathematics are "to generate understanding and insight; to generate and confirm or confront conjectures; and generally to make mathematics more tangible, lively and fun for both the professional researcher and the novice".
The uses of experimental mathematics have been defined as follows:    Gaining insight and intuition.
Discovering new patterns and relationships.
Using graphical displays to suggest underlying mathematical principles.
Testing and especially falsifying conjectures.
Exploring a possible result to see if it is worth formal proof.
Suggesting approaches for formal proof.
Replacing lengthy hand derivations with computer-based derivations.
Confirming analytically derived results.
Tools and techniques   Experimental mathematics makes use of numerical methods to calculate approximate values for integrals and infinite series .
Arbitrary precision arithmetic is often used to establish these values to a high degree of precision – typically 100 significant figures or more.
Integer relation algorithms are then used to search for relations between these values and mathematical constants .
Working with high precision values reduces the possibility of mistaking a mathematical coincidence for a true relation.
A formal proof of a conjectured relation will then be sought – it is often easier to find a formal proof once the form of a conjectured relation is known.
If a counterexample is being sought or a large-scale proof by exhaustion is being attempted, distributed computing techniques may be used to divide the calculations between multiple computers.
Frequent use is made of general mathematical software or domain-specific software written for attacks on problems that require high efficiency.
Experimental mathematics software usually includes error detection and correction mechanisms, integrity checks and redundant calculations designed to minimise the possibility of results being invalidated by a hardware or software error.
Applications and examples   Applications and examples of experimental mathematics include:  Searching for a counterexample to a conjecture Roger Frye used experimental mathematics techniques to find the smallest counterexample to Euler's sum of powers conjecture .
The ZetaGrid project was set up to search for a counterexample to the Riemann hypothesis .
Tomás Oliveira e Silva  searched for a counterexample to the Collatz conjecture .
Finding new examples of numbers or objects with particular properties The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search is searching for new Mersenne primes .
The Great Periodic Path Hunt is searching for new periodic paths.
distributed.net 's OGR project searched for optimal Golomb rulers .
The PrimeGrid project is searching for the smallest Riesel and Sierpiński numbers.
Finding serendipitous numerical patterns Edward Lorenz found the Lorenz attractor , an early example of a chaotic dynamical system , by investigating anomalous behaviours in a numerical weather model.
The Ulam spiral was discovered by accident.
The pattern in the Ulam numbers was discovered by accident.
Mitchell Feigenbaum 's discovery of the Feigenbaum constant was based initially on numerical observations, followed by a rigorous proof.
Use of computer programs to check a large but finite number of cases to complete a computer-assisted  proof by exhaustion  Thomas Hales 's proof of the Kepler conjecture .
Various proofs of the four colour theorem .
Clement Lam 's proof of the non-existence of a finite projective plane of order 10.
Gary McGuire proved a minimum uniquely solvable Sudoku requires 17 clues.
Symbolic validation (via computer algebra ) of conjectures to motivate the search for an analytical proof Solutions to a special case of the quantum three-body problem known as the hydrogen molecule-ion were found standard quantum chemistry basis sets before realizing they all lead to the same unique analytical solution in terms of a generalization of the Lambert W function .
Related to this work is the isolation of a previously unknown link between gravity theory and quantum mechanics in lower dimensions (see quantum gravity and references therein).
In the realm of relativistic many-bodied mechanics , namely the time-symmetric  Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory : the equivalence between an advanced Liénard–Wiechert potential of particle j acting on particle i and the corresponding potential for particle i acting on particle j was demonstrated exhaustively to order     1   /    c   10      {\displaystyle 1/c^{10}}   before being proved mathematically.
The Wheeler-Feynman theory has regained interest because of quantum nonlocality .
In the realm of linear optics, verification of the series expansion of the envelope of the electric field for ultrashort light pulses travelling in non isotropic media .
Previous expansions had been incomplete: the outcome revealed an extra term vindicated by experiment.
Evaluation of infinite series , infinite products and integrals (also see symbolic integration ), typically by carrying out a high precision numerical calculation, and then using an integer relation algorithm (such as the Inverse Symbolic Calculator ) to find a linear combination of mathematical constants that matches this value.
For example, the following identity was rediscovered by Enrico Au-Yeung, a student of Jonathan Borwein using computer search and PSLQ algorithm in 1993:             ∑   k  =  1    ∞      1   k   2        (   1  +    1  2    +    1  3    +  ⋯  +    1  k     )    2    =     17   π   4     360    .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\sum _{k=1}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{k^{2}}}\left(1+{\frac {1}{2}}+{\frac {1}{3}}+\cdots +{\frac {1}{k}}\right)^{2}={\frac {17\pi ^{4}}{360}}.\end{aligned}}}    Visual investigations In Indra's Pearls , David Mumford and others investigated various properties of Möbius transformation and the Schottky group using computer generated images of the groups which: furnished convincing evidence for many conjectures and lures to further exploration .
Plausible but false examples   Main article: mathematical coincidence  Some plausible relations hold to a high degree of accuracy, but are still not true.
One example is:       ∫   0    ∞    cos  ⁡  (  2  x  )   ∏   n  =  1    ∞    cos  ⁡   (    x  n    )    d   x  =    π  8    .
{\displaystyle \int _{0}^{\infty }\cos(2x)\prod _{n=1}^{\infty }\cos \left({\frac {x}{n}}\right)\mathrm {d} x={\frac {\pi }{8}}.}
The two sides of this expression actually differ after the 42nd decimal place.
Another example is that the maximum height (maximum absolute value of coefficients) of all the factors of x n − 1 appears to be the same as the height of the n th cyclotomic polynomial .
This was shown by computer to be true for n < 10000 and was expected to be true for all n .
However, a larger computer search showed that this equality fails to hold for n = 14235, when the height of the n th cyclotomic polynomial is 2, but maximum height of the factors is 3.
Practitioners   The following mathematicians and computer scientists have made significant contributions to the field of experimental mathematics:   Fabrice Bellard  David H.
Bailey  Jonathan Borwein  David Epstein  Helaman Ferguson  Ronald Graham  Thomas Callister Hales  Donald Knuth  Clement Lam  Oren Patashnik  Simon Plouffe  Eric Weisstein  Stephen Wolfram  Doron Zeilberger  A.J.
Han Vinck  Study of the basic mathematical concepts  For the book by Hilbert and Bernays, see Grundlagen der Mathematik .
Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Foundations of mathematics is the study of the philosophical and logical  and/or algorithmic basis of mathematics , or, in a broader sense, the mathematical investigation of what underlies the philosophical theories concerning the nature of mathematics.
In this latter sense, the distinction between foundations of mathematics and philosophy of mathematics turns out to be vague.
Foundations of mathematics can be conceived as the study of the basic mathematical concepts (set, function, geometrical figure, number, etc.)
and how they form hierarchies of more complex structures and concepts, especially the fundamentally important structures that form the language of mathematics (formulas, theories and their models giving a meaning to formulas, definitions, proofs, algorithms, etc.)
also called metamathematical concepts , with an eye to the philosophical aspects and the unity of mathematics.
The search for foundations of mathematics is a central question of the philosophy of mathematics; the abstract nature of mathematical objects presents special philosophical challenges.
The foundations of mathematics as a whole does not aim to contain the foundations of every mathematical topic.
Generally, the foundations of a field of study refers to a more-or-less systematic analysis of its most basic or fundamental concepts, its conceptual unity and its natural ordering or hierarchy of concepts, which may help to connect it with the rest of human knowledge.
The development, emergence , and clarification of the foundations can come late in the history of a field, and might not be viewed by everyone as its most interesting part.
Mathematics plays a special role in scientific thought, serving since ancient times as a model of truth and rigor for rational inquiry, and giving tools or even a foundation for other sciences (especially Physics).
Mathematics' many developments towards higher abstractions in the 19th century brought new challenges and paradoxes, urging for a deeper and more systematic examination of the nature and criteria of mathematical truth , as well as a unification of the diverse branches of mathematics into a coherent whole.
The systematic search for the foundations of mathematics started at the end of the 19th century and formed a new mathematical discipline called mathematical logic , which later had strong links to theoretical computer science .
It went through a series of crises with paradoxical results, until the discoveries stabilized during the 20th century as a large and coherent body of mathematical knowledge with several aspects or components ( set theory , model theory , proof theory , etc.
), whose detailed properties and possible variants are still an active research field.
Its high level of technical sophistication inspired many philosophers to conjecture that it can serve as a model or pattern for the foundations of other sciences.
Historical context   See also: History of logic and History of mathematics  Ancient Greek mathematics   Further information: Ancient Greek mathematics  While the practice of mathematics had previously developed in other civilizations, special interest in its theoretical and foundational aspects was clearly evident in the work of the Ancient Greeks.
Early Greek philosophers disputed as to which is more basic, arithmetic or geometry.
Zeno of Elea (490 –  c.
430 BC) produced four paradoxes that seem to show the impossibility of change.
The Pythagorean school of mathematics originally insisted that only natural and rational numbers exist.
The discovery of the irrationality of √ 2 , the ratio of the diagonal of a square to its side (around 5th century BC), was a shock to them which they only reluctantly accepted.
The discrepancy between rationals and reals was finally resolved by Eudoxus of Cnidus (408–355 BC), a student of Plato , who reduced the comparison of two irrational ratios to comparisons of multiples of the magnitudes involved.
His method anticipated that of the Dedekind cut in the modern definition of real numbers by Richard Dedekind (1831–1916).
In the Posterior Analytics , Aristotle (384–322 BC) laid down the axiomatic method for organizing a field of knowledge logically by means of primitive concepts, axioms, postulates, definitions, and theorems.
Aristotle took a majority of his examples for this from arithmetic and from geometry.
This method reached its high point with Euclid 's Elements (300 BC), a treatise on mathematics structured with very high standards of rigor: Euclid justifies each proposition by a demonstration in the form of chains of syllogisms (though they do not always conform strictly to Aristotelian templates).
Aristotle's syllogistic logic, together with the axiomatic method exemplified by Euclid's Elements , are recognized as scientific achievements of ancient Greece.
Platonism as a philosophy of mathematics   This section needs additional citations for verification .
( October 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Further information: Platonism (mathematics)  Starting from the end of the 19th century, a Platonist view of mathematics became common among practicing mathematicians.
The concepts or, as Platonists would have it, the objects of mathematics are abstract and remote from everyday perceptual experience: geometrical figures are conceived as idealities to be distinguished from effective drawings and shapes of objects, and numbers are not confused with the counting of concrete objects.
Their existence and nature present special philosophical challenges: How do mathematical objects differ from their concrete representation?
Are they located in their representation, or in our minds, or somewhere else?
How can we know them?
The ancient Greek philosophers took such questions very seriously.
Indeed, many of their general philosophical discussions were carried on with extensive reference to geometry and arithmetic.
Plato (424/423 BC –  348/347 BC) insisted that mathematical objects, like other platonic Ideas (forms or essences), must be perfectly abstract and have a separate, non-material kind of existence, in a world of mathematical objects independent of humans.
He believed that the truths about these objects also exist independently of the human mind, but is discovered by humans.
In the Meno Plato's teacher Socrates asserts that it is possible to come to know this truth by a process akin to memory retrieval.
Above the gateway to Plato's academy appeared a famous inscription: "Let no one who is ignorant of geometry enter here".
In this way Plato indicated his high opinion of geometry.
He regarded geometry as "the first essential in the training of philosophers", because of its abstract character.
This philosophy of Platonist mathematical realism is shared by many mathematicians.
Some authors argue that Platonism somehow comes as a necessary assumption underlying any mathematical work.
In this view, the laws of nature and the laws of mathematics have a similar status, and the effectiveness ceases to be unreasonable.
Not our axioms, but the very real world of mathematical objects forms the foundation.
Aristotle dissected and rejected this view in his Metaphysics .
These questions provide much fuel for philosophical analysis and debate.
Aristotelian realism   Further information: Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics  Middle Ages and Renaissance   For over 2,000 years, Euclid's Elements stood as a perfectly solid foundation for mathematics, as its methodology of rational exploration guided mathematicians, philosophers, and scientists well into the 19th century.
The Middle Ages saw a dispute over the ontological status of the universals (platonic Ideas): Realism asserted their existence independently of perception; conceptualism asserted their existence within the mind only; nominalism denied either, only seeing universals as names of collections of individual objects (following older speculations that they are words, " logoi ").
René Descartes published La Géométrie (1637), aimed at reducing geometry to algebra by means of coordinate systems, giving algebra a more foundational role (while the Greeks used lengths to define the numbers that are presently called real numbers ).
Descartes' book became famous after 1649 and paved the way to infinitesimal calculus.
Isaac Newton (1642–1727) in England and Leibniz (1646–1716) in Germany independently developed the infinitesimal calculus on a basis that required new foundations.
In particular, Leibniz described infinitesimals as numbers that are infinitely close to zero, a concept that does not fit in previous foundational framework of mathematics, and was not formalized before the 20th century.
The strong implications of infinitesimal calculus on foundations of mathematics is illustrated by a pamphlet of the  Protestant philosopher George Berkeley (1685–1753), who wrote " are neither finite quantities, nor quantities infinitely small, nor yet nothing.
May we not call them the ghosts of departed quantities?".
Leibniz also worked on logic but most of his writings on it remained unpublished until 1903.
In the following centuries, mathematics developed very rapidly and successfully in physical applications.
19th century   In the 19th century , mathematics became increasingly abstract.
Concerns about logical gaps and inconsistencies in different fields led to the development of axiomatic systems.
Real analysis   See also: Mathematical analysis § History  Cauchy (1789–1857) started the project of formulating and proving the theorems of infinitesimal calculus in a rigorous manner, rejecting the heuristic principle of the generality of algebra exploited by earlier authors.
In his 1821 work Cours d'Analyse he defines infinitely small quantities in terms of decreasing sequences that converge to 0, which he then used to define continuity.
But he did not formalize his notion of convergence.
The modern (ε, δ)-definition of limit and continuous functions was first developed by Bolzano in 1817, but remained relatively unknown.
It gives a rigorous foundation of infinitesimal calculus based on the set of real numbers, arguably resolving the Zeno paradoxes and Berkeley's arguments.
Mathematicians such as Karl Weierstrass (1815–1897) discovered pathological functions such as continuous, nowhere-differentiable functions .
Weierstrass began to advocate the arithmetization of analysis , to axiomatize analysis using properties of the natural numbers.
In 1858, Dedekind proposed a definition of the real numbers as cuts of rational numbers.
This reduction of real numbers and continuous functions in terms of rational numbers, and thus of natural numbers, was later integrated by Cantor in his set theory, and axiomatized in terms of second order arithmetic by Hilbert and Bernays.
Group theory   See also: History of group theory  For the first time, the limits of mathematics were explored.
Niels Henrik Abel (1802–1829), a Norwegian, and Évariste Galois , (1811–1832) a Frenchman, investigated the solutions of various polynomial equations, and proved that there is no general algebraic solution to equations of degree greater than four ( Abel–Ruffini theorem ).
With these concepts, Pierre Wantzel (1837) proved that straightedge and compass alone cannot trisect an arbitrary angle nor double a cube .
In 1882, Lindemann building on the work of Hermite showed that a straightedge and compass quadrature of the circle (construction of a square equal in area to a given circle) was also impossible by proving that π is a transcendental number .
Mathematicians had attempted to solve all of these problems in vain since the time of the ancient Greeks.
Abel and Galois's works opened the way for the developments of group theory (which would later be used to study symmetry in physics and other fields), and abstract algebra .
Concepts of vector spaces emerged from the conception of barycentric coordinates by Möbius in 1827, to the modern definition of vector spaces and linear maps by Peano in 1888.
Geometry was no more limited to three dimensions.
These concepts did not generalize numbers but combined notions of functions and sets which were not yet formalized, breaking away from familiar mathematical objects.
Non-Euclidean geometries   See also: Non-Euclidean geometry § History  After many failed attempts to derive the parallel postulate from other axioms, the study of the still hypothetical hyperbolic geometry by Johann Heinrich Lambert (1728–1777) led him to introduce the hyperbolic functions and compute the area of a hyperbolic triangle (where the sum of angles is less than 180°).
Then the Russian mathematician Nikolai Lobachevsky (1792–1856) established in 1826 (and published in 1829) the coherence of this geometry (thus the independence of the parallel postulate ), in parallel with the Hungarian mathematician János Bolyai (1802–1860) in 1832, and with Gauss .
Later in the 19th century, the German mathematician Bernhard Riemann developed Elliptic geometry , another non-Euclidean geometry where no parallel can be found and the sum of angles in a triangle is more than 180°.
It was proved consistent by defining point to mean a pair of antipodal points on a fixed sphere and line to mean a great circle on the sphere.
At that time, the main method for proving the consistency of a set of axioms was to provide a model for it.
Projective geometry   One of the traps in a deductive system is circular reasoning , a problem that seemed to befall projective geometry until it was resolved by Karl von Staudt .
As explained by Russian historians:    In the mid-nineteenth century there was an acrimonious controversy between the proponents of synthetic and analytic methods in projective geometry, the two sides accusing each other of mixing projective and metric concepts.
Indeed the basic concept that is applied in the synthetic presentation of projective geometry, the cross-ratio of four points of a line, was introduced through consideration of the lengths of intervals.
The purely geometric approach of von Staudt was based on the complete quadrilateral to express the relation of projective harmonic conjugates .
Then he created a means of expressing the familiar numeric properties with his Algebra of Throws .
English language versions of this process of deducing the properties of a field can be found in either the book by Oswald Veblen and John Young, Projective Geometry (1938), or more recently in John Stillwell 's Four Pillars of Geometry (2005).
Stillwell writes on page 120  ...
projective geometry is simpler than algebra in a certain sense, because we use only five geometric axioms to derive the nine field axioms.
The algebra of throws is commonly seen as a feature of cross-ratios since students ordinarily rely upon numbers without worry about their basis.
However, cross-ratio calculations use metric features of geometry, features not admitted by purists.
For instance, in 1961 Coxeter wrote Introduction to Geometry without mention of cross-ratio.
Boolean algebra and logic   Attempts of formal treatment of mathematics had started with Leibniz and Lambert (1728–1777), and continued with works by algebraists such as George Peacock (1791–1858).
Systematic mathematical treatments of logic came with the British mathematician George Boole (1847) who devised an algebra that soon evolved into what is now called Boolean algebra , in which the only numbers were 0 and 1 and logical combinations (conjunction, disjunction, implication and negation) are operations similar to the addition and multiplication of integers.
Additionally, De Morgan published his laws in 1847.
Logic thus became a branch of mathematics.
Boolean algebra is the starting point of mathematical logic and has important applications in computer science .
Charles Sanders Peirce built upon the work of Boole to develop a logical system for relations and quantifiers , which he published in several papers from 1870 to 1885.
The German mathematician Gottlob Frege (1848–1925) presented an independent development of logic with quantifiers in his Begriffsschrift (formula language) published in 1879, a work generally considered as marking a turning point in the history of logic.
He exposed deficiencies in Aristotle's Logic , and pointed out the three expected properties of a mathematical theory    Consistency : impossibility of proving contradictory statements.
Completeness : any statement is either provable or refutable (i.e.
its negation is provable).
Decidability : there is a decision procedure to test any statement in the theory.
He then showed in Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (Basic Laws of Arithmetic) how arithmetic could be formalised in his new logic.
Frege's work was popularized by Bertrand Russell near the turn of the century.
But Frege's two-dimensional notation had no success.
Popular notations were (x) for universal and (∃x) for existential quantifiers, coming from Giuseppe Peano and William Ernest Johnson until the ∀ symbol was introduced by Gerhard Gentzen in 1935 and became canonical in the 1960s.
Peano arithmetic   Main article: Peano axioms  The formalization of arithmetic (the theory of natural numbers ) as an axiomatic theory started with Peirce in 1881 and continued with Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano in 1888.
This was still a second-order axiomatization (expressing induction in terms of arbitrary subsets, thus with an implicit use of set theory ) as concerns for expressing theories in first-order logic were not yet understood.
In Dedekind's work, this approach appears as completely characterizing natural numbers and providing recursive definitions of addition and multiplication from the successor function and mathematical induction .
Foundational crisis   The foundational crisis of mathematics (in German  Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik )
arose at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century with the discovery of several paradoxes or counter-intuitive results.
The first one was the proof that the parallel postulate cannot be proved.
This results from a construction of a Non-Euclidean geometry inside Euclidean geometry , whose inconsistency would imply the inconsistency of Euclidean geometry.
A well known paradox is Russell's paradox , which shows that the phrase "the set of all sets that do not contain themselves" is self-contradictory.
Other philosophical problems were the proof of the existence of mathematical objects that cannot be computed or explicitly described, and the proof of the existence of theorems of arithmetic that cannot be proved with Peano arithmetic .
Several schools of philosophy of mathematics were challenged with these problems in the 20th century, and are described below.
Philosophical views   Main article: Philosophy of mathematics  At the beginning of the 20th century, three schools of philosophy of mathematics opposed each other: Formalism, Intuitionism and Logicism.
The Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences held in Königsberg in 1930 gave space to these three schools.
Formalism   Main article: Formalism (mathematics)  It has been claimed that formalists, such as David Hilbert (1862–1943), hold that mathematics is only a language and a series of games.
Indeed, he used the words "formula game" in his 1927 response to L.
E.
J.
Brouwer 's criticisms:  And to what extent has the formula game thus made possible been successful?
This formula game enables us to express the entire thought-content of the science of mathematics in a uniform manner and develop it in such a way that, at the same time, the interconnections between the individual propositions and facts become clear ...
The formula game that Brouwer so deprecates has, besides its mathematical value, an important general philosophical significance.
For this formula game is carried out according to certain definite rules, in which the technique of our thinking is expressed.
These rules form a closed system that can be discovered and definitively stated.
Thus Hilbert is insisting that mathematics is not an arbitrary game with arbitrary rules; rather it must agree with how our thinking, and then our speaking and writing, proceeds.
We are not speaking here of arbitrariness in any sense.
Mathematics is not like a game whose tasks are determined by arbitrarily stipulated rules.
Rather, it is a conceptual system possessing internal necessity that can only be so and by no means otherwise.
The foundational philosophy of formalism, as exemplified by David Hilbert , is a response to the paradoxes of set theory , and is based on formal logic .
Virtually all mathematical theorems today can be formulated as theorems of set theory.
The truth of a mathematical statement, in this view, is represented by the fact that the statement can be derived from the axioms of set theory using the rules of formal logic.
Merely the use of formalism alone does not explain several issues: why we should use the axioms we do and not some others, why we should employ the logical rules we do and not some others, why "true" mathematical statements (e.g., the laws of arithmetic ) appear to be true, and so on.
Hermann Weyl posed these very questions to Hilbert:  What "truth" or objectivity can be ascribed to this theoretic construction of the world, which presses far beyond the given, is a profound philosophical problem.
It is closely connected with the further question: what impels us to take as a basis precisely the particular axiom system developed by Hilbert?
Consistency is indeed a necessary but not a sufficient condition.
For the time being we probably cannot answer this question ...
In some cases these questions may be sufficiently answered through the study of formal theories, in disciplines such as reverse mathematics and computational complexity theory .
As noted by Weyl, formal logical systems also run the risk of inconsistency ; in Peano arithmetic , this arguably has already been settled with several proofs of consistency , but there is debate over whether or not they are sufficiently finitary to be meaningful.
Gödel's second incompleteness theorem establishes that logical systems of arithmetic can never contain a valid proof of their own consistency .
What Hilbert wanted to do was prove a logical system S was consistent, based on principles P that only made up a small part of S .
But Gödel proved that the principles P could not even prove P to be consistent, let alone S .
Intuitionism   Main articles: Intuitionism and Constructivism (mathematics)  Intuitionists, such as L.
E.
J.
Brouwer (1882–1966), hold that mathematics is a creation of the human mind.
Numbers, like fairy tale characters, are merely mental entities, which would not exist if there were never any human minds to think about them.
The foundational philosophy of intuitionism or constructivism , as exemplified in the extreme by Brouwer and Stephen Kleene , requires proofs to be "constructive" in nature –  the existence of an object must be demonstrated rather than inferred from a demonstration of the impossibility of its non-existence.
For example, as a consequence of this the form of proof known as reductio ad absurdum is suspect.
Some modern theories in the philosophy of mathematics deny the existence of foundations in the original sense.
Some theories tend to focus on mathematical practice , and aim to describe and analyze the actual working of mathematicians as a social group .
Others try to create a cognitive science of mathematics , focusing on human cognition as the origin of the reliability of mathematics when applied to the real world.
These theories would propose to find foundations only in human thought, not in any objective outside construct.
The matter remains controversial.
Logicism   Main article: Logicism  Logicism is a school of thought, and research programme, in the philosophy of mathematics, based on the thesis that mathematics is an extension of logic or that some or all mathematics may be derived in a suitable formal system whose axioms and rules of inference are 'logical' in nature.
Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead championed this theory initiated by Gottlob Frege and influenced by Richard Dedekind .
Set-theoretic Platonism   Main article: Set-theoretic Platonism  Many researchers in axiomatic set theory have subscribed to what is known as set-theoretic Platonism , exemplified by Kurt Gödel .
Several set theorists followed this approach and actively searched for axioms that may be considered as true for heuristic reasons and that would decide the continuum hypothesis .
Many large cardinal axioms were studied, but the hypothesis always remained independent from them and it is now considered unlikely that CH can be resolved by a new large cardinal axiom.
Other types of axioms were considered, but none of them has reached consensus on the continuum hypothesis yet.
Recent work by Hamkins proposes a more flexible alternative: a set-theoretic multiverse allowing free passage between set-theoretic universes that satisfy the continuum hypothesis and other universes that do not.
Indispensability argument for realism   Main article: Quine–Putnam indispensability argument  This argument by Willard Quine and Hilary Putnam says (in Putnam's shorter words),  ...
quantification over mathematical entities is indispensable for science ...
therefore we should accept such quantification; but this commits us to accepting the existence of the mathematical entities in question.
However, Putnam was not a Platonist.
Rough-and-ready realism   Few mathematicians are typically concerned on a daily, working basis over logicism, formalism or any other philosophical position.
Instead, their primary concern is that the mathematical enterprise as a whole always remains productive.
Typically, they see this as ensured by remaining open-minded, practical and busy; as potentially threatened by becoming overly-ideological, fanatically reductionistic or lazy.
Such a view has also been expressed by some well-known physicists.
For example, the Physics Nobel Prize laureate Richard Feynman said  People say to me, "Are you looking for the ultimate laws of physics?"
No, I'm not ...
If it turns out there is a simple ultimate law which explains everything, so be it – that would be very nice to discover.
If it turns out it's like an onion with millions of layers ...
then that's the way it is.
But either way there's Nature and she's going to come out the way She is.
So therefore when we go to investigate we shouldn't predecide what it is we're looking for only to find out more about it.
And Steven Weinberg :    The insights of philosophers have occasionally benefited physicists, but generally in a negative fashion – by protecting them from the preconceptions of other philosophers.
...
without some guidance from our preconceptions one could do nothing at all.
It is just that philosophical principles have not generally provided us with the right preconceptions.
Weinberg believed that any undecidability in mathematics, such as the continuum hypothesis, could be potentially resolved despite the incompleteness theorem, by finding suitable further axioms to add to set theory.
Philosophical consequences of Gödel's completeness theorem   Main article: Gödel's completeness theorem  Gödel's completeness theorem establishes an equivalence in first-order logic between the formal provability of a formula and its truth in all possible models.
Precisely, for any consistent first-order theory it gives an "explicit construction" of a model described by the theory; this model will be countable if the language of the theory is countable.
However this "explicit construction" is not algorithmic.
It is based on an iterative process of completion of the theory, where each step of the iteration consists in adding a formula to the axioms if it keeps the theory consistent; but this consistency question is only semi-decidable (an algorithm is available to find any contradiction but if there is none this consistency fact can remain unprovable).
This can be seen as giving a sort of justification to the Platonist view that the objects of our mathematical theories are real.
More precisely, it shows that the mere assumption of the existence of the set of natural numbers as a totality (an actual infinity) suffices to imply the existence of a model (a world of objects) of any consistent theory.
However several difficulties remain:  For any consistent theory this usually does not give just one world of objects, but an infinity of possible worlds that the theory might equally describe, with a possible diversity of truths between them.
In the case of set theory, none of the models obtained by this construction resemble the intended model, as they are countable while set theory intends to describe uncountable infinities.
Similar remarks can be made in many other cases.
For example, with theories that include arithmetic, such constructions generally give models that include non-standard numbers, unless the construction method was specifically designed to avoid them.
As it gives models to all consistent theories without distinction, it gives no reason to accept or reject any axiom as long as the theory remains consistent, but regards all consistent axiomatic theories as referring to equally existing worlds.
It gives no indication on which axiomatic system should be preferred as a foundation of mathematics.
As claims of consistency are usually unprovable, they remain a matter of belief or non-rigorous kinds of justifications.
Hence the existence of models as given by the completeness theorem needs in fact two philosophical assumptions: the actual infinity of natural numbers and the consistency of the theory.
Another consequence of the completeness theorem is that it justifies the conception of infinitesimals as actual infinitely small nonzero quantities, based on the existence of non-standard models as equally legitimate to standard ones.
This idea was formalized by Abraham Robinson into the theory of nonstandard analysis .
More paradoxes   See also: List of statements independent of ZFC and List of paradoxes  The following lists some notable results in metamathematics.
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory is the most widely studied axiomatization of set theory.
It is abbreviated ZFC when it includes the axiom of choice and ZF when the axiom of choice is excluded.
1920: Thoralf Skolem corrected Leopold Löwenheim 's proof of what is now called the downward Löwenheim–Skolem theorem , leading to Skolem's paradox discussed in 1922, namely the existence of countable models of ZF, making infinite cardinalities a relative property.
1922: Proof by Abraham Fraenkel that the axiom of choice cannot be proved from the axioms of Zermelo set theory with urelements .
1931: Publication of Gödel's incompleteness theorems , showing that essential aspects of Hilbert's program could not be attained.
It showed how to construct, for any sufficiently powerful and consistent recursively axiomatizable system –  such as necessary to axiomatize the elementary theory of arithmetic on the (infinite) set of natural numbers –  a statement that formally expresses its own unprovability, which he then proved equivalent to the claim of consistency of the theory; so that (assuming the consistency as true), the system is not powerful enough for proving its own consistency, let alone that a simpler system could do the job.
It thus became clear that the notion of mathematical truth can not be completely determined and reduced to a purely formal system as envisaged in Hilbert's program.
This dealt a final blow to the heart of Hilbert's program, the hope that consistency could be established by finitistic means (it was never made clear exactly what axioms were the "finitistic" ones, but whatever axiomatic system was being referred to, it was a 'weaker' system than the system whose consistency it was supposed to prove).
1936: Alfred Tarski proved his truth undefinability theorem .
1936: Alan Turing proved that a general algorithm to solve the halting problem for all possible program-input pairs cannot exist.
1938: Gödel proved the consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum hypothesis .
1936–1937: Alonzo Church and Alan Turing , respectively, published independent papers showing that a general solution to the Entscheidungsproblem is impossible: the universal validity of statements in first-order logic is not decidable (it is only semi-decidable as given by the completeness theorem ).
1955: Pyotr Novikov showed that there exists a finitely presented group G such that the word problem for G is undecidable.
1963: Paul Cohen showed that the Continuum Hypothesis is unprovable from ZFC .
1964: Inspired by the fundamental randomness in physics, Gregory Chaitin starts publishing results on algorithmic information theory (measuring incompleteness and randomness in mathematics).
1966: Paul Cohen showed that the axiom of choice is unprovable in ZF even without urelements .
1970: Hilbert's tenth problem is proven unsolvable: there is no recursive solution to decide whether a Diophantine equation (multivariable polynomial equation) has a solution in integers.
1971: Suslin's problem is proven to be independent from ZFC.
Toward resolution of the crisis   Starting in 1935, the Bourbaki group of French mathematicians started publishing a series of books to formalize many areas of mathematics on the new foundation of set theory.
The intuitionistic school did not attract many adherents, and it was not until Bishop 's work in 1967 that constructive mathematics was placed on a sounder footing.
One may consider that Hilbert's program has been partially completed , so that the crisis is essentially resolved, satisfying ourselves with lower requirements than Hilbert's original ambitions.
His ambitions were expressed in a time when nothing was clear: it was not clear whether mathematics could have a rigorous foundation at all.
There are many possible variants of set theory, which differ in consistency strength, where stronger versions (postulating higher types of infinities) contain formal proofs of the consistency of weaker versions, but none contains a formal proof of its own consistency.
Thus the only thing we don't have is a formal proof of consistency of whatever version of set theory we may prefer, such as ZF.
In practice, most mathematicians either do not work from axiomatic systems, or if they do, do not doubt the consistency of ZFC , generally their preferred axiomatic system.
In most of mathematics as it is practiced, the incompleteness and paradoxes of the underlying formal theories never played a role anyway, and in those branches in which they do or whose formalization attempts would run the risk of forming inconsistent theories (such as logic and category theory), they may be treated carefully.
The development of category theory in the middle of the 20th century showed the usefulness of set theories guaranteeing the existence of larger classes than does ZFC, such as Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory or Tarski–Grothendieck set theory , albeit that in very many cases the use of large cardinal axioms or Grothendieck universes is formally eliminable.
One goal of the reverse mathematics program is to identify whether there are areas of "core mathematics" in which foundational issues may again provoke a crisis.
Infinitely detailed mathematical structure  For other uses, see Fractal (disambiguation) .
Mandelbrot set at the cardioid left boundary  The Mandelbrot set : its boundary is a fractal curve with Hausdorff dimension 2.
(Note that the colored sections of the image are not actually part of the Mandelbrot Set, but rather they are based on how quickly the function that produces it diverges.)
Mandelbrot set with 12 encirclements     Zooming into the boundary of the Mandelbrot set  In mathematics , a fractal is a geometric shape containing detailed structure at arbitrarily small scales, usually having a fractal dimension strictly exceeding the topological dimension .
Many fractals appear similar at various scales, as illustrated in successive magnifications of the Mandelbrot set .
This exhibition of similar patterns at increasingly smaller scales is called self-similarity , also known as expanding symmetry or unfolding symmetry; if this replication is exactly the same at every scale, as in the Menger sponge , the shape is called affine self-similar.
Fractal geometry lies within the mathematical branch of measure theory .
One way that fractals are different from finite geometric figures is how they scale .
Doubling the edge lengths of a filled polygon multiplies its area by four, which is two (the ratio of the new to the old side length) raised to the power of two (the conventional dimension of the filled polygon).
Likewise, if the radius of a filled sphere is doubled, its volume scales by eight, which is two (the ratio of the new to the old radius) to the power of three (the conventional dimension of the filled sphere).
However, if a fractal's one-dimensional lengths are all doubled, the spatial content of the fractal scales by a power that is not necessarily an integer and is in general greater than its conventional dimension.
This power is called the fractal dimension of the geometric object, to distinguish it from the conventional dimension (which is formally called the topological dimension ).
Analytically, many fractals are nowhere differentiable .
An infinite fractal curve can be conceived of as winding through space differently from an ordinary line – although it is still topologically 1-dimensional , its fractal dimension indicates that it locally fills space more efficiently than an ordinary line.
Sierpinski carpet (to level 6), a fractal with a topological dimension of 1 and a Hausdorff dimension of 1.893  A line segment is similar to a proper part of itself, but hardly a fractal.
Starting in the 17th century with notions of recursion , fractals have moved through increasingly rigorous mathematical treatment to the study of continuous but not differentiable functions in the 19th century by the seminal work of Bernard Bolzano , Bernhard Riemann , and Karl Weierstrass ,  and on to the coining of the word fractal in the 20th century with a subsequent burgeoning of interest in fractals and computer-based modelling in the 20th century.
There is some disagreement among mathematicians about how the concept of a fractal should be formally defined.
Mandelbrot himself summarized it as "beautiful, damn hard, increasingly useful.
That's fractals."
More formally, in 1982 Mandelbrot defined fractal as follows: "A fractal is by definition a set for which the Hausdorff–Besicovitch dimension strictly exceeds the topological dimension ."
Later, seeing this as too restrictive, he simplified and expanded the definition to this: "A fractal is a rough or fragmented geometric shape that can be split into parts, each of which is (at least approximately) a reduced-size copy of the whole."
Still later, Mandelbrot proposed "to use fractal without a pedantic definition, to use fractal dimension as a generic term applicable to all the variants".
The consensus among mathematicians is that theoretical fractals are infinitely self-similar iterated and detailed mathematical constructs, of which many examples have been formulated and studied.
Fractals are not limited to geometric patterns, but can also describe processes in time.
Fractal patterns with various degrees of self-similarity have been rendered or studied in visual, physical, and aural media  and found in nature ,      technology ,      art ,   and architecture .
Fractals are of particular relevance in the field of chaos theory because they show up in the geometric depictions of most chaotic processes (typically either as attractors or as boundaries between basins of attraction).
Etymology   The term "fractal" was coined by the mathematician Benoît Mandelbrot in 1975.
Mandelbrot based it on the Latin frāctus , meaning "broken" or "fractured", and used it to extend the concept of theoretical fractional dimensions to geometric patterns in nature .
Introduction   A simple fractal tree  A fractal "tree" to eleven iterations  The word "fractal" often has different connotations for the lay public as opposed to mathematicians, where the public is more likely to be familiar with fractal art than the mathematical concept.
The mathematical concept is difficult to define formally, even for mathematicians, but key features can be understood with a little mathematical background.
The feature of "self-similarity", for instance, is easily understood by analogy to zooming in with a lens or other device that zooms in on digital images to uncover finer, previously invisible, new structure.
If this is done on fractals, however, no new detail appears; nothing changes and the same pattern repeats over and over, or for some fractals, nearly the same pattern reappears over and over.
Self-similarity itself is not necessarily counter-intuitive (e.g., people have pondered self-similarity informally such as in the infinite regress in parallel mirrors or the homunculus , the little man inside the head of the little man inside the head ...).
The difference for fractals is that the pattern reproduced must be detailed.
: 166, 18    This idea of being detailed relates to another feature that can be understood without much mathematical background: Having a fractal dimension greater than its topological dimension, for instance, refers to how a fractal scales compared to how geometric shapes are usually perceived.
A straight line, for instance, is conventionally understood to be one-dimensional; if such a figure is rep-tiled into pieces each 1/3 the length of the original, then there are always three equal pieces.
A solid square is understood to be two-dimensional; if such a figure is rep-tiled into pieces each scaled down by a factor of 1/3 in both dimensions, there are a total of 3 2 = 9 pieces.
We see that for ordinary self-similar objects, being n-dimensional means that when it is rep-tiled into pieces each scaled down by a scale-factor of 1/ r , there are a total of r n pieces.
Now, consider the Koch curve .
It can be rep-tiled into four sub-copies, each scaled down by a scale-factor of 1/3.
So, strictly by analogy, we can consider the "dimension" of the Koch curve as being the unique real number D that satisfies 3 D = 4.
This number is called the fractal dimension of the Koch curve; it is not the conventionally perceived dimension of a curve.
In general, a key property of fractals is that the fractal dimension differs from the conventionally understood dimension (formally called the topological dimension).
3D computer-generated fractal  This also leads to understanding a third feature, that fractals as mathematical equations are "nowhere differentiable ".
In a concrete sense, this means fractals cannot be measured in traditional ways.
To elaborate, in trying to find the length of a wavy non-fractal curve, one could find straight segments of some measuring tool small enough to lay end to end over the waves, where the pieces could get small enough to be considered to conform to the curve in the normal manner of measuring with a tape measure.
But in measuring an infinitely "wiggly" fractal curve such as the Koch snowflake, one would never find a small enough straight segment to conform to the curve, because the jagged pattern would always re-appear, at arbitrarily small scales, essentially pulling a little more of the tape measure into the total length measured each time one attempted to fit it tighter and tighter to the curve.
The result is that one must need infinite tape to perfectly cover the entire curve, i.e.
the snowflake has an infinite perimeter.
History   A Koch snowflake is a fractal that begins with an equilateral triangle and then replaces the middle third of every line segment with a pair of line segments that form an equilateral bump  Cantor (ternary) set  The history of fractals traces a path from chiefly theoretical studies to modern applications in computer graphics , with several notable people contributing canonical fractal forms along the way.
A common theme in traditional African architecture is the use of fractal scaling, whereby small parts of the structure tend to look similar to larger parts, such as a circular village made of circular houses.
According to Pickover , the mathematics behind fractals began to take shape in the 17th century when the mathematician and philosopher Gottfried Leibniz pondered recursive  self-similarity (although he made the mistake of thinking that only the straight line was self-similar in this sense).
In his writings, Leibniz used the term "fractional exponents", but lamented that "Geometry" did not yet know of them.
: 405 Indeed, according to various historical accounts, after that point few mathematicians tackled the issues and the work of those who did remained obscured largely because of resistance to such unfamiliar emerging concepts, which were sometimes referred to as mathematical "monsters".
Thus, it was not until two centuries had passed that on July 18, 1872 Karl Weierstrass presented the first definition of a function with a graph that would today be considered a fractal, having the non- intuitive property of being everywhere continuous but nowhere differentiable at the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences.
: 7   In addition, the quotient difference becomes arbitrarily large as the summation index increases.
Not long after that, in 1883, Georg Cantor , who attended lectures by Weierstrass,  published examples of subsets of the real line known as Cantor sets , which had unusual properties and are now recognized as fractals.
: 11–24 Also in the last part of that century, Felix Klein and Henri Poincaré introduced a category of fractal that has come to be called "self-inverse" fractals.
: 166    A Julia set , a fractal related to the Mandelbrot set  A Sierpinski gasket can be generated by a fractal tree.
One of the next milestones came in 1904, when Helge von Koch , extending ideas of Poincaré and dissatisfied with Weierstrass's abstract and analytic definition, gave a more geometric definition including hand-drawn images of a similar function, which is now called the Koch snowflake .
: 25  Another milestone came a decade later in 1915, when Wacław Sierpiński constructed his famous triangle then, one year later, his carpet .
By 1918, two French mathematicians, Pierre Fatou and Gaston Julia , though working independently, arrived essentially simultaneously at results describing what is now seen as fractal behaviour associated with mapping complex numbers and iterative functions and leading to further ideas about attractors and repellors (i.e., points that attract or repel other points), which have become very important in the study of fractals.
Very shortly after that work was submitted, by March 1918, Felix Hausdorff expanded the definition of "dimension", significantly for the evolution of the definition of fractals, to allow for sets to have non-integer dimensions.
The idea of self-similar curves was taken further by Paul Lévy , who, in his 1938 paper Plane or Space Curves and Surfaces Consisting of Parts Similar to the Whole , described a new fractal curve, the Lévy C curve .
A strange attractor that exhibits multifractal scaling  Uniform mass center triangle fractal  2x 120 degrees recursive IFS  Different researchers have postulated that without the aid of modern computer graphics, early investigators were limited to what they could depict in manual drawings, so lacked the means to visualize the beauty and appreciate some of the implications of many of the patterns they had discovered (the Julia set, for instance, could only be visualized through a few iterations as very simple drawings).
: 179   That changed, however, in the 1960s, when Benoit Mandelbrot started writing about self-similarity in papers such as How Long Is the Coast of Britain?
Statistical Self-Similarity and Fractional Dimension ,   which built on earlier work by Lewis Fry Richardson .
In 1975,  Mandelbrot solidified hundreds of years of thought and mathematical development in coining the word "fractal" and illustrated his mathematical definition with striking computer-constructed visualizations.
These images, such as of his canonical Mandelbrot set , captured the popular imagination; many of them were based on recursion, leading to the popular meaning of the term "fractal".
In 1980, Loren Carpenter gave a presentation at the SIGGRAPH where he introduced his software for generating and rendering fractally generated landscapes.
Definition and characteristics   One often cited description that Mandelbrot published to describe geometric fractals is "a rough or fragmented geometric shape that can be split into parts, each of which is (at least approximately) a reduced-size copy of the whole";  this is generally helpful but limited.
Authors disagree on the exact definition of fractal , but most usually elaborate on the basic ideas of self-similarity and the unusual relationship fractals have with the space they are embedded in.
One point agreed on is that fractal patterns are characterized by fractal dimensions , but whereas these numbers quantify complexity (i.e., changing detail with changing scale), they neither uniquely describe nor specify details of how to construct particular fractal patterns.
In 1975 when Mandelbrot coined the word "fractal", he did so to denote an object whose Hausdorff–Besicovitch dimension is greater than its topological dimension .
However, this requirement is not met by space-filling curves such as the Hilbert curve .
Because of the trouble involved in finding one definition for fractals, some argue that fractals should not be strictly defined at all.
According to Falconer , fractals should be only generally characterized by a gestalt of the following features;    Self-similarity, which may include:  Exact self-similarity: identical at all scales, such as the Koch snowflake  Quasi self-similarity: approximates the same pattern at different scales; may contain small copies of the entire fractal in distorted and degenerate forms; e.g., the Mandelbrot set 's satellites are approximations of the entire set, but not exact copies.
Statistical self-similarity: repeats a pattern stochastically so numerical or statistical measures are preserved across scales; e.g., randomly generated fractals like the well-known example of the coastline of Britain for which one would not expect to find a segment scaled and repeated as neatly as the repeated unit that defines fractals like the Koch snowflake.
Qualitative self-similarity: as in a time series   Multifractal scaling: characterized by more than one fractal dimension or scaling rule  Fine or detailed structure at arbitrarily small scales.
A consequence of this structure is fractals may have emergent properties  (related to the next criterion in this list).
Irregularity locally and globally that cannot easily be described in the language of traditional Euclidean geometry other than as the limit of a recursively defined sequence of stages.
For images of fractal patterns, this has been expressed by phrases such as "smoothly piling up surfaces" and "swirls upon swirls";  see Common techniques for generating fractals .
As a group, these criteria form guidelines for excluding certain cases, such as those that may be self-similar without having other typically fractal features.
A straight line, for instance, is self-similar but not fractal because it lacks detail, and is easily described in Euclidean language without a need for recursion.
Common techniques for generating fractals   See also: Fractal-generating software    Self-similar branching pattern modeled in silico using L-systems principles   Images of fractals can be created by fractal generating programs .
Because of the butterfly effect , a small change in a single variable can have an unpredictable outcome.
Iterated function systems (IFS) – use fixed geometric replacement rules; may be stochastic or deterministic;  e.g., Koch snowflake , Cantor set , Haferman carpet,   Sierpinski carpet , Sierpinski gasket , Peano curve , Harter-Heighway dragon curve , T-square , Menger sponge  Strange attractors – use iterations of a map or solutions of a system of initial-value differential or difference equations that exhibit chaos (e.g., see multifractal image, or the logistic map )  L-systems – use string rewriting; may resemble branching patterns, such as in plants, biological cells (e.g., neurons and immune system cells  ), blood vessels, pulmonary structure,  etc.
or turtle graphics patterns such as space-filling curves and tilings  Escape-time fractals – use a formula or recurrence relation at each point in a space (such as the complex plane ); usually quasi-self-similar; also known as "orbit" fractals; e.g., the Mandelbrot set , Julia set , Burning Ship fractal , Nova fractal and Lyapunov fractal .
The 2d vector fields that are generated by one or two iterations of escape-time formulae also give rise to a fractal form when points (or pixel data) are passed through this field repeatedly.
Random fractals – use stochastic rules; e.g., Lévy flight , percolation clusters , self avoiding walks , fractal landscapes , trajectories of Brownian motion and the Brownian tree (i.e., dendritic fractals generated by modeling diffusion-limited aggregation or reaction-limited aggregation clusters).
A fractal generated by a finite subdivision rule for an alternating link  Finite subdivision rules – use a recursive topological algorithm for refining tilings  and they are similar to the process of cell division .
The iterative processes used in creating the Cantor set and the Sierpinski carpet are examples of finite subdivision rules, as is barycentric subdivision .
Applications   Simulated fractals   Fractal patterns have been modeled extensively, albeit within a range of scales rather than infinitely, owing to the practical limits of physical time and space.
Models may simulate theoretical fractals or natural phenomena with fractal features .
The outputs of the modelling process may be highly artistic renderings, outputs for investigation, or benchmarks for fractal analysis .
Some specific applications of fractals to technology are listed elsewhere .
Images and other outputs of modelling are normally referred to as being "fractals" even if they do not have strictly fractal characteristics, such as when it is possible to zoom into a region of the fractal image that does not exhibit any fractal properties.
Also, these may include calculation or display artifacts which are not characteristics of true fractals.
Modeled fractals may be sounds,  digital images, electrochemical patterns, circadian rhythms ,  etc.
Fractal patterns have been reconstructed in physical 3-dimensional space  : 10 and virtually, often called " in silico " modeling.
Models of fractals are generally created using fractal-generating software that implements techniques such as those outlined above.
As one illustration, trees, ferns, cells of the nervous system,  blood and lung vasculature,  and other branching patterns in nature can be modeled on a computer by using recursive algorithms and L-systems techniques.
The recursive nature of some patterns is obvious in certain examples—a branch from a tree or a frond from a fern is a miniature replica of the whole: not identical, but similar in nature.
Similarly, random fractals have been used to describe/create many highly irregular real-world objects, such as coastlines and mountains.
A limitation of modeling fractals is that resemblance of a fractal model to a natural phenomenon does not prove that the phenomenon being modeled is formed by a process similar to the modeling algorithms.
Natural phenomena with fractal features   Further information: Patterns in nature  Approximate fractals found in nature display self-similarity over extended, but finite, scale ranges.
The connection between fractals and leaves, for instance, is currently being used to determine how much carbon is contained in trees.
Phenomena known to have fractal features include:   Actin cytoskeleton   Algae  Animal coloration patterns  Blood vessels and pulmonary vessels   Brownian motion (generated by a one-dimensional Wiener process ).
Clouds and rainfall areas   Coastlines  Craters  Crystals   DNA  Dust grains   Earthquakes    Fault lines  Geometrical optics   Heart rates   Heart sounds  Lake shorelines and areas     Lightning bolts  Mountain-goat horns  Neurons  Polymers  Percolation  Mountain ranges  Ocean waves   Pineapple  Proteins   Psychedelic Experience  Purkinje cells   Rings of Saturn    River networks  Romanesco broccoli  Snowflakes   Soil pores   Surfaces in turbulent flows    Trees      Frost crystals occurring naturally on cold glass form fractal patterns     Fractal basin boundary in a geometrical optical system      A fractal is formed when pulling apart two glue-covered acrylic sheets     High-voltage breakdown within a 4 in (100 mm) block of acrylic glass creates a fractal Lichtenberg figure     Romanesco broccoli , showing self-similar form approximating a natural fractal     Fractal defrosting patterns, polar Mars.
The patterns are formed by sublimation of frozen CO 2 .
Width of image is about a kilometer.
Slime mold  Brefeldia maxima growing fractally on wood     Psilomelane  dendrites in the Solnhofen Limestone    Fractals in cell biology   Fractals often appear in the realm of living organisms where they arise through branching processes and other complex pattern formation.
Ian Wong and co-workers have shown that migrating cells can form fractals by clustering and branching .
Nerve cells function through processes at the cell surface, with phenomena that are enhanced by largely increasing the surface to volume ratio.
As a consequence nerve cells often are found to form into fractal patterns.
These processes are crucial in cell physiology and different pathologies .
Multiple subcellular structures also are found to assemble into fractals.
Diego Krapf has shown that through branching processes the actin filaments in human cells assemble into fractal patterns.
Similarly Matthias Weiss showed that the endoplasmic reticulum displays fractal features.
The current understanding is that fractals are ubiquitous in cell biology, from proteins , to organelles , to whole cells.
In creative works   Further information: Fractal art and Mathematics and art  Since 1999 numerous scientific groups have performed fractal analysis on over 50 paintings created by Jackson Pollock by pouring paint directly onto horizontal canvasses.
Recently, fractal analysis has been used to achieve a 93% success rate in distinguishing real from imitation Pollocks.
Cognitive neuroscientists have shown that Pollock's fractals induce the same stress-reduction in observers as computer-generated fractals and Nature's fractals.
Decalcomania , a technique used by artists such as Max Ernst , can produce fractal-like patterns.
It involves pressing paint between two surfaces and pulling them apart.
Cyberneticist Ron Eglash has suggested that fractal geometry and mathematics are prevalent in African art , games, divination , trade, and architecture.
Circular houses appear in circles of circles, rectangular houses in rectangles of rectangles, and so on.
Such scaling patterns can also be found in African textiles, sculpture, and even cornrow hairstyles.
Hokky Situngkir also suggested the similar properties in Indonesian traditional art, batik , and ornaments found in traditional houses.
Ethnomathematician Ron Eglash has discussed the planned layout of Benin city using fractals as the basis, not only in the city itself and the villages but even in the rooms of houses.
He commented that "When Europeans first came to Africa, they considered the architecture very disorganised and thus primitive.
It never occurred to them that the Africans might have been using a form of mathematics that they hadn't even discovered yet."
In a 1996 interview with Michael Silverblatt , David Foster Wallace explained that the structure of the first draft of Infinite Jest he gave to his editor Michael Pietsch was inspired by fractals, specifically the Sierpinski triangle (a.k.a.
Sierpinski gasket), but that the edited novel is "more like a lopsided Sierpinsky Gasket".
Some works by the Dutch artist M.
C.
Escher , such as Circle Limit III , contain shapes repeated to infinity that become smaller and smaller as they get near to the edges, in a pattern that would always look the same if zoomed in.
Aesthetics and Psychological Effects of Fractal Based Design:  Highly prevalent in nature, fractal patterns possess self-similar components that repeat at varying size scales.
The perceptual experience of human-made environments can be impacted with inclusion of these natural patterns.
Previous work has demonstrated consistent trends in preference for and complexity estimates of fractal patterns.
However, limited information has been gathered on the impact of other visual judgments.
Here we examine the aesthetic and perceptual experience of fractal ‘global-forest’ designs already installed in humanmade spaces and demonstrate how fractal pattern components are associated with positive psychological experiences that can be utilized to promote occupant well-being.
These designs are composite fractal patterns consisting of individual fractal ‘tree-seeds’ which combine to create a ‘global fractal forest.’ The local ‘tree-seed’ patterns, global configuration of tree-seed locations, and overall resulting ‘global-forest’ patterns have fractal qualities.
These designs span multiple mediums yet are all intended to lower occupant stress without detracting from the function and overall design of the space.
In this series of studies, we first establish divergent relationships between various visual attributes, with pattern complexity, preference, and engagement ratings increasing with fractal complexity compared to ratings of refreshment and relaxation which stay the same or decrease with complexity.
Subsequently, we determine that the local constituent fractal (‘tree-seed’) patterns contribute to the perception of the overall fractal design, and address how to balance aesthetic and psychological effects (such as individual experiences of perceived engagement and relaxation) in fractal design installations.
This set of studies demonstrates that fractal preference is driven by a balance between increased arousal (desire for engagement and complexity) and decreased tension (desire for relaxation or refreshment).
Installations of these composite mid-high complexity ‘global-forest’ patterns consisting of ‘tree-seed’ components balance these contrasting needs, and can serve as a practical implementation of biophilic patterns in human-made environments to promote occupant well-being.
A fractal that models the surface of a mountain (animation)     3D recursive image     Recursive fractal butterfly image     A fractal flame    Physiological responses   Humans appear to be especially well-adapted to processing fractal patterns with fractal dimension between 1.3 and 1.5.
When humans view fractal patterns with fractal dimension between 1.3 and 1.5, this tends to reduce physiological stress.
Applications in technology   Main article: Fractal analysis   Fractal antennas   Fractal transistor   Fractal heat exchangers   Digital imaging  Architecture   Urban growth    Classification of histopathology slides  Fractal landscape or Coastline  complexity  Detecting 'life as we don't know it' by fractal analysis   Enzymes ( Michaelis–Menten kinetics )  Generation of new music  Signal and image compression  Creation of digital photographic enlargements  Fractal in soil mechanics  Computer and video game design  Computer Graphics  Organic environments  Procedural generation  Fractography and fracture mechanics  Small angle scattering theory of fractally rough systems  T-shirts and other fashion  Generation of patterns for camouflage, such as MARPAT  Digital sundial  Technical analysis of price series  Fractals in networks  Medicine   Neuroscience    Diagnostic Imaging   Pathology    Geology   Geography   Archaeology    Soil mechanics   Seismology   Search and rescue   Morton order space filling curves for GPU  cache coherency in texture mapping ,     rasterisation   and indexing of turbulence data.
===Visual proof===
Although not a formal proof, a visual demonstration of a mathematical theorem is sometimes called a "]".
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Mathematical proof expressed visually  Proof without words of the Nicomachus theorem ( Gulley (2010) ) that the sum of the first n  cubes is the square of the n th triangular number  In mathematics , a proof without words (or visual proof ) is an illustration of an identity or mathematical statement which can be demonstrated as self-evident by a diagram without any accompanying explanatory text.
Such proofs can be considered more elegant than formal or mathematically rigorous proofs due to their self-evident nature.
When the diagram demonstrates a particular case of a general statement, to be a proof, it must be generalisable.
A proof without words is not the same as a mathematical proof , because it omits the details of the logical argument it illustrates.
However, it can provide valuable intuitions to the viewer that can help them formulate or better understand a true proof.
Examples   Sum of odd numbers   A proof without words for the sum of odd numbers theorem.
The statement that the sum of all positive odd numbers up to 2 n − 1 is a perfect square —more specifically, the perfect square n 2 —can be demonstrated by a proof without words.
In one corner of a grid, a single block represents 1, the first square.
That can be wrapped on two sides by a strip of three blocks (the next odd number) to make a 2 × 2 block: 4, the second square.
Adding a further five blocks makes a 3 × 3 block: 9, the third square.
This process can be continued indefinitely.
Pythagorean theorem   Main article: Pythagorean theorem § Rearrangement proofs  Rearrangement proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
The uncovered area of gray space remains constant before and after the rearrangement of the triangles: on the left it is shown to equal c² , and on the right a²+b² .
The Pythagorean theorem that      a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}+b^{2}=c^{2}}   can be proven without words.
One method of doing so is to visualise a larger square of sides     a  +  b    {\displaystyle a+b}   , with four right-angled triangles of sides     a    {\displaystyle a}   ,     b    {\displaystyle b}   and     c    {\displaystyle c}   in its corners, such that the space in the middle is a diagonal square with an area of      c   2      {\displaystyle c^{2}}   .
The four triangles can be rearranged within the larger square to split its unused space into two squares of      a   2      {\displaystyle a^{2}}   and      b   2      {\displaystyle b^{2}}   .
Jensen's inequality   A graphical proof of Jensen's inequality.
Jensen's inequality can also be proven graphically.
A dashed curve along the X axis is the hypothetical distribution of X , while a dashed curve along the Y axis is the corresponding distribution of Y values.
The convex mapping Y ( X ) increasingly "stretches" the distribution for increasing values of X .
Usage   Mathematics Magazine and the College Mathematics Journal run a regular feature titled "Proof without words" containing, as the title suggests, proofs without words.
The Art of Problem Solving and USAMTS websites run Java applets illustrating proofs without words.
Compared to formal proofs   For a proof to be accepted by the mathematical community, it must logically show how the statement it aims to prove follows totally and inevitably from a set of assumptions .
A proof without words might imply such an argument, but it does not make one directly, so it cannot take the place of a formal proof where one is required.
Rather, mathematicians use proofs without words as illustrations and teaching aids for ideas that have already been proven formally.
Shape with three sides  This article is about the basic geometric shape.
For other uses, see Triangle (disambiguation) .
"Triagonal" redirects here.
For diagonals of three-dimensional shapes, see Space diagonal .
Triangle A triangle Edges and vertices 3 Schläfli symbol {3} (for equilateral) Area various methods; see below Internal angle ( degrees ) 60° (for equilateral)  Triangle = Tri (three) + Angle  A triangle is a polygon with three corners and three sides, one of the basic shapes in geometry .
The corners, also called vertices , are zero- dimensional  points while the sides connecting them, also called edges , are one-dimensional line segments .
The triangle's interior is a two-dimensional region.
Sometimes an arbitrary edge is chosen to be the base , in which case the opposite vertex is called the apex .
In Euclidean geometry , any two points determine a unique line segment situated within a unique straight line , and any three points, when non- collinear , determine a unique triangle situated within a unique flat plane .
More generally, several points in Euclidean space of arbitrary dimension determine a simplex .
In non-Euclidean geometries three straight segments also determine a triangle, for instance a spherical triangle or hyperbolic triangle .
A geodesic triangle is a region of a general two-dimensional surface enclosed by three sides which are straight relative to the surface.
A curvilinear triangle is a shape with three curved sides, for instance a circular triangle with circular-arc sides.
This article is about straight-sided triangles in Euclidean geometry, except where otherwise noted.
A triangle with vertices     A  ,    {\displaystyle A,}        B  ,    {\displaystyle B,}   and     C    {\displaystyle C}   is denoted     △  A  B  C  .
{\displaystyle \triangle ABC.}
In describing metrical relations within a triangle, it is common to represent the length of the edge opposite each vertex using a lower-case letter, letting     a    {\displaystyle a}   be the length of the edge     B  C  ,    {\displaystyle BC,}        b    {\displaystyle b}   the length of     C  A  ,    {\displaystyle CA,}   and     c    {\displaystyle c}   the length of     A  B    {\displaystyle AB}   ; and to represent the angle measure at each corner using a Greek letter, letting     α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   be the measure of angle     ∠  C  A  B  ,    {\displaystyle \angle CAB,}        β    {\displaystyle \beta }   the measure of     ∠  A  B  C  ,    {\displaystyle \angle ABC,}   and     γ    {\displaystyle \gamma }   the measure of     ∠  B  C  A  .
{\displaystyle \angle BCA.}
Types of triangle  Euler diagram of types of triangles, using the definition that isosceles triangles have at least 2 equal sides (i.e., equilateral triangles are isosceles).
The terminology for categorizing triangles is more than two thousand years old, having been defined on the very first page of Euclid's Elements .
The names used for modern classification are either a direct transliteration of Euclid's Greek or their Latin translations.
By lengths of sides  Ancient Greek mathematician Euclid defined three types of triangle according to the lengths of their sides:     Greek : τῶν δὲ τριπλεύρων σχημάτων ἰσόπλευρον μὲν τρίγωνόν ἐστι τὸ τὰς τρεῖς ἴσας ἔχον πλευράς, ἰσοσκελὲς δὲ τὸ τὰς δύο μόνας ἴσας ἔχον πλευράς, σκαληνὸν δὲ τὸ τὰς τρεῖς ἀνίσους ἔχον πλευράς , lit.
'Of trilateral figures, an isopleuron  triangle is that which has its three sides equal, an isosceles that which has two of its sides alone equal, and a scalene that which has its three sides unequal.'
An equilateral triangle ( Greek : ἰσόπλευρον , romanized : isópleuron , lit.
'equal sides') has three sides of the same length.
An equilateral triangle is also a regular polygon with all angles measuring 60°.
An isosceles triangle ( Greek : ἰσοσκελὲς , romanized : isoskelés , lit.
'equal legs') has two sides of equal length.
An isosceles triangle also has two angles of the same measure, namely the angles opposite to the two sides of the same length.
This fact is the content of the isosceles triangle theorem , which was known by Euclid .
Some mathematicians define an isosceles triangle to have exactly two equal sides, whereas others define an isosceles triangle as one with at least two equal sides.
The latter definition would make all equilateral triangles isosceles triangles.
The 45–45–90 right triangle, which appears in the tetrakis square tiling , is isosceles.
A scalene triangle ( Greek : σκαληνὸν , romanized : skalinón , lit.
'unequal') has all its sides of different lengths.
Equivalently, it has all angles of different measure.
Equilateral Triangle     Isosceles triangle     Scalene triangle    Hatch marks , also called tick marks, are used in diagrams of triangles and other geometric figures to identify sides of equal lengths.
A side can be marked with a pattern of "ticks", short line segments in the form of tally marks ; two sides have equal lengths if they are both marked with the same pattern.
In a triangle, the pattern is usually no more than 3 ticks.
An equilateral triangle has the same pattern on all 3 sides, an isosceles triangle has the same pattern on just 2 sides, and a scalene triangle has different patterns on all sides since no sides are equal.
Similarly, patterns of 1, 2, or 3 concentric arcs inside the angles are used to indicate equal angles: an equilateral triangle has the same pattern on all 3 angles, an isosceles triangle has the same pattern on just 2 angles, and a scalene triangle has different patterns on all angles, since no angles are equal.
By internal angles  The first page of Euclid's Elements , from the world's first printed version (1482), showing the "definitions" section of Book I.
The right triangle is labeled " orthogonius ", and the two angles shown are "acutus" and "angulus obtusus".
Triangles can also be classified according to their internal angles , measured here in degrees .
A right triangle (or right-angled triangle ) has one of its interior angles measuring 90° (a right angle ).
The side opposite to the right angle is the hypotenuse , the longest side of the triangle.
The other two sides are called the legs or catheti  (singular: cathetus ) of the triangle.
Right triangles obey the Pythagorean theorem : the sum of the squares of the lengths of the two legs is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse.
Special right triangles are right triangles with additional properties that make calculations involving them easier.
One of the two most famous is the 3–4–5 right triangle, where 3 2 + 4 2 = 5 2 .
The 3–4–5 triangle is also known as the Egyptian triangle.
In this situation, 3, 4, and 5 are a Pythagorean triple .
The other one is an isosceles triangle that has 2 angles measuring 45 degrees (45–45–90 triangle).
Right triangles are fundamental in trigonometry , as they can be used to define trigonometric functions through trigonometric ratios .
Triangles that do not have an angle measuring 90° are called oblique triangles .
A triangle with all interior angles measuring less than 90° is an acute triangle or acute-angled triangle .
If c is the length of the longest side, then a 2 + b 2 > c 2 , where a and b are the lengths of the other sides.
A triangle with one interior angle measuring more than 90° is an obtuse triangle or obtuse-angled triangle .
If c is the length of the longest side, then a 2 + b 2 < c 2 , where a and b are the lengths of the other sides.
A triangle with an interior angle of 180° (and collinear vertices) is degenerate .
A right degenerate triangle has collinear vertices, two of which are coincident.
A triangle that has two angles with the same measure also has two sides with the same length, and therefore it is an isosceles triangle.
It follows that in a triangle where all angles have the same measure, all three sides have the same length, and therefore is equilateral.
Right  Obtuse  Acute                       ⏟         {\displaystyle \quad \underbrace {\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad } _{}}        Oblique  Basic facts  A triangle, showing exterior angle d.
 Triangles are assumed to be two- dimensional  plane figures , unless the context provides otherwise (see § Non-planar triangles , below).
In rigorous treatments, a triangle is therefore called a 2- simplex (see also Polytope ).
Elementary facts about triangles were presented by Euclid , in books 1–4 of his Elements , written around 300 BC.
The measures of the interior angles of the triangle always add up to 180 degrees (same color to point out they are equal).
The sum of the measures of the interior angles of a triangle in Euclidean space is always 180 degrees.
This fact is equivalent to Euclid's parallel postulate .
This allows determination of the measure of the third angle of any triangle, given the measure of two angles.
An exterior angle of a triangle is an angle that is a linear pair (and hence supplementary ) to an interior angle.
The measure of an exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the measures of the two interior angles that are not adjacent to it; this is the exterior angle theorem .
The sum of the measures of the three exterior angles (one for each vertex) of any triangle is 360 degrees.
Similarity and congruence  Two triangles are said to be similar , if every angle of one triangle has the same measure as the corresponding angle in the other triangle.
The corresponding sides of similar triangles have lengths that are in the same proportion, and this property is also sufficient to establish similarity.
Some basic theorems about similar triangles are:  If and only if one pair of internal angles of two triangles have the same measure as each other, and another pair also have the same measure as each other, the triangles are similar.
If and only if one pair of corresponding sides of two triangles are in the same proportion as are another pair of corresponding sides, and their included angles have the same measure, then the triangles are similar.
(The included angle for any two sides of a polygon is the internal angle between those two sides.)
If and only if three pairs of corresponding sides of two triangles are all in the same proportion, then the triangles are similar.
Two triangles that are congruent have exactly the same size and shape:  all pairs of corresponding interior angles are equal in measure, and all pairs of corresponding sides have the same length.
(This is a total of six equalities, but three are often sufficient to prove congruence.)
Some individually necessary and sufficient conditions for a pair of triangles to be congruent are:  SAS Postulate: Two sides in a triangle have the same length as two sides in the other triangle, and the included angles have the same measure.
ASA: Two interior angles and the included side in a triangle have the same measure and length, respectively, as those in the other triangle.
(The included side for a pair of angles is the side that is common to them.)
SSS: Each side of a triangle has the same length as a corresponding side of the other triangle.
AAS: Two angles and a corresponding (non-included) side in a triangle have the same measure and length, respectively, as those in the other triangle.
(This is sometimes referred to as AAcorrS and then includes ASA above.)
Some individually sufficient conditions are:  Hypotenuse-Leg (HL) Theorem: The hypotenuse and a leg in a right triangle have the same length as those in another right triangle.
This is also called RHS (right-angle, hypotenuse, side).
Hypotenuse-Angle Theorem: The hypotenuse and an acute angle in one right triangle have the same length and measure, respectively, as those in the other right triangle.
This is just a particular case of the AAS theorem.
An important condition is:  Side-Side-Angle (or Angle-Side-Side) condition: If two sides and a corresponding non-included angle of a triangle have the same length and measure, respectively, as those in another triangle, then this is not sufficient to prove congruence; but if the angle given is opposite to the longer side of the two sides, then the triangles are congruent.
The Hypotenuse-Leg Theorem is a particular case of this criterion.
The Side-Side-Angle condition does not by itself guarantee that the triangles are congruent because one triangle could be obtuse-angled and the other acute-angled.
Two right triangles are similar if and only if they have an acute angle of the same measure.
It follows that the six possible ratios between side lengths of a right triangle depend only of the measure of one of the acute angles.
These ratios are called trigonometric ratios and are commonly used as a definition of trigonometric functions .
Right triangles  The Pythagorean theorem  A central theorem is the Pythagorean theorem , which states in any right triangle , the square of the length of the hypotenuse equals the sum of the squares of the lengths of the two other sides.
If the hypotenuse has length c , and the legs have lengths a and b , then the theorem states that       a   2    +   b   2    =   c   2    .
The converse is true: if the lengths of the sides of a triangle satisfy the above equation, then the triangle has a right angle opposite side c .
Some other facts about right triangles:  The acute angles of a right triangle are complementary .
A  +  B  +   90   ∘    =   180   ∘    ⇒  A  +  B  =   90   ∘    ⇒  A  =   90   ∘    −  B  .
{\displaystyle A+B+90^{\circ }=180^{\circ }\Rightarrow A+B=90^{\circ }\Rightarrow A=90^{\circ }-B.}
If the legs of a right triangle have the same length, then the angles opposite those legs have the same measure.
Since these angles are complementary, it follows that each measures 45 degrees.
By the Pythagorean theorem, the length of the hypotenuse is the length of a leg times √ 2 .
In a right triangle with acute angles measuring 30 and 60 degrees, the hypotenuse is twice the length of the shorter side, and the longer side is equal to the length of the shorter side times √ 3 :      c  =  2  a     {\displaystyle c=2a\,}        b  =  a  ×    3    .
{\displaystyle b=a\times {\sqrt {3}}.}
For all triangles, angles and sides are related by the law of cosines and law of sines (also called the cosine rule and sine rule ).
Existence of a triangle  Condition on the sides  The triangle inequality states that the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle must be greater than or equal to the length of the third side.
That sum can equal the length of the third side only in the case of a degenerate triangle, one with collinear vertices.
It is not possible for that sum to be less than the length of the third side.
A triangle with three given positive side lengths exists if and only if those side lengths satisfy the triangle inequality.
Conditions on the angles  Three given angles form a non-degenerate triangle (and indeed an infinitude of them) if and only if both of these conditions hold: (a) each of the angles is positive, and (b) the angles sum to 180°.
If degenerate triangles are permitted, angles of 0° are permitted.
Trigonometric conditions  Three positive angles α , β , and γ , each of them less than 180°, are the angles of a triangle if and only if any one of the following conditions holds:      tan  ⁡    α  2    tan  ⁡    β  2    +  tan  ⁡    β  2    tan  ⁡    γ  2    +  tan  ⁡    γ  2    tan  ⁡    α  2    =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \tan {\frac {\alpha }{2}}\tan {\frac {\beta }{2}}+\tan {\frac {\beta }{2}}\tan {\frac {\gamma }{2}}+\tan {\frac {\gamma }{2}}\tan {\frac {\alpha }{2}}=1,}          sin   2    ⁡    α  2    +   sin   2    ⁡    β  2    +   sin   2    ⁡    γ  2    +  2  sin  ⁡    α  2    sin  ⁡    β  2    sin  ⁡    γ  2    =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \sin ^{2}{\frac {\alpha }{2}}+\sin ^{2}{\frac {\beta }{2}}+\sin ^{2}{\frac {\gamma }{2}}+2\sin {\frac {\alpha }{2}}\sin {\frac {\beta }{2}}\sin {\frac {\gamma }{2}}=1,}         sin  ⁡  (  2  α  )  +  sin  ⁡  (  2  β  )  +  sin  ⁡  (  2  γ  )  =  4  sin  ⁡  (  α  )  sin  ⁡  (  β  )  sin  ⁡  (  γ  )  ,    {\displaystyle \sin(2\alpha )+\sin(2\beta )+\sin(2\gamma )=4\sin(\alpha )\sin(\beta )\sin(\gamma ),}         cos   2    ⁡  α  +   cos   2    ⁡  β  +   cos   2    ⁡  γ  +  2  cos  ⁡  (  α  )  cos  ⁡  (  β  )  cos  ⁡  (  γ  )  =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \cos ^{2}\alpha +\cos ^{2}\beta +\cos ^{2}\gamma +2\cos(\alpha )\cos(\beta )\cos(\gamma )=1,}         tan  ⁡  (  α  )  +  tan  ⁡  (  β  )  +  tan  ⁡  (  γ  )  =  tan  ⁡  (  α  )  tan  ⁡  (  β  )  tan  ⁡  (  γ  )  ,    {\displaystyle \tan(\alpha )+\tan(\beta )+\tan(\gamma )=\tan(\alpha )\tan(\beta )\tan(\gamma ),}    the last equality applying only if none of the angles is 90° (so the tangent function's value is always finite).
Points, lines, and circles associated with a triangle  There are thousands of different constructions that find a special point associated with (and often inside) a triangle, satisfying some unique property: see the article Encyclopedia of Triangle Centers for a catalogue of them.
Often they are constructed by finding three lines associated in a symmetrical way with the three sides (or vertices) and then proving that the three lines meet in a single point: an important tool for proving the existence of these is Ceva's theorem , which gives a criterion for determining when three such lines are concurrent .
Similarly, lines associated with a triangle are often constructed by proving that three symmetrically constructed points are collinear : here Menelaus' theorem gives a useful general criterion.
In this section just a few of the most commonly encountered constructions are explained.
The circumcenter is the center of a circle passing through the three vertices of the triangle.
A perpendicular bisector of a side of a triangle is a straight line passing through the midpoint of the side and being perpendicular to it, i.e.
forming a right angle with it.
The three perpendicular bisectors meet in a single point, the triangle's circumcenter , usually denoted by O ; this point is the center of the circumcircle , the circle passing through all three vertices.
The diameter of this circle, called the "circumdiameter", can be found from the law of sines stated above.
The circumcircle's radius is called the "circumradius".
Thales' theorem implies that if the circumcenter is located on a side of the triangle, then the opposite angle is a right one.
If the circumcenter is located inside the triangle, then the triangle is acute; if the circumcenter is located outside the triangle, then the triangle is obtuse.
The intersection of the altitudes is the orthocenter .
An altitude of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex and perpendicular to (i.e.
forming a right angle with) the opposite side.
This opposite side is called the base of the altitude, and the point where the altitude intersects the base (or its extension) is called the foot of the altitude.
The length of the altitude is the distance between the base and the vertex.
The three altitudes intersect in a single point, called the orthocenter of the triangle, usually denoted by H .
The orthocenter lies inside the triangle if and only if the triangle is acute.
The intersection of the angle bisectors is the center of the incircle .
An angle bisector of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex which cuts the corresponding angle in half.
The three angle bisectors intersect in a single point, the incenter , usually denoted by I , the center of the triangle's incircle .
The incircle is the circle which lies inside the triangle and touches all three sides.
Its radius is called the inradius .
There are three other important circles, the excircles ; they lie outside the triangle and touch one side as well as the extensions of the other two.
The centers of the in- and excircles form an orthocentric system .
The intersection of the medians is the centroid .
A median of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex and the midpoint of the opposite side, and divides the triangle into two equal areas.
The three medians intersect in a single point, the triangle's centroid or geometric barycenter, usually denoted by G .
The centroid of a rigid triangular object (cut out of a thin sheet of uniform density) is also its center of mass : the object can be balanced on its centroid in a uniform gravitational field.
The centroid cuts every median in the ratio 2:1, i.e.
the distance between a vertex and the centroid is twice the distance between the centroid and the midpoint of the opposite side.
Nine-point circle demonstrates a symmetry where six points lie on the edge of the triangle.
The midpoints of the three sides and the feet of the three altitudes all lie on a single circle, the triangle's nine-point circle .
The remaining three points for which it is named are the midpoints of the portion of altitude between the vertices and the orthocenter .
The radius of the nine-point circle is half that of the circumcircle.
It touches the incircle (at the Feuerbach point ) and the three excircles .
Euler's line is a straight line through the orthocenter (blue), center of the nine-point circle (red), centroid (orange), and circumcenter (green)  The orthocenter (blue point), center of the nine-point circle (red), centroid (orange), and circumcenter (green) all lie on a single line, known as Euler's line (red line).
The center of the nine-point circle lies at the midpoint between the orthocenter and the circumcenter, and the distance between the centroid and the circumcenter is half that between the centroid and the orthocenter.
The center of the incircle is not in general located on Euler's line.
If one reflects a median in the angle bisector that passes through the same vertex, one obtains a symmedian .
The three symmedians intersect in a single point, the symmedian point of the triangle.
Computing the sides and angles  There are various standard methods for calculating the length of a side or the measure of an angle.
Certain methods are suited to calculating values in a right-angled triangle; more complex methods may be required in other situations.
Trigonometric ratios in right triangles  Main article: Trigonometric ratios  A right triangle always includes a 90° (π/2 radians) angle, here with label C.
Angles A and B may vary.
Trigonometric functions specify the relationships among side lengths and interior angles of a right triangle.
In right triangles , the trigonometric ratios of sine, cosine and tangent can be used to find unknown angles and the lengths of unknown sides.
The sides of the triangle are known as follows:  The hypotenuse is the side opposite the right angle, or defined as the longest side of a right-angled triangle, in this case h .
The opposite side is the side opposite to the angle we are interested in, in this case a .
The adjacent side is the side that is in contact with the angle we are interested in and the right angle, hence its name.
In this case the adjacent side is b .
Sine, cosine and tangent  The sine of an angle is the ratio of the length of the opposite side to the length of the hypotenuse.
In our case      sin  ⁡  A  =    opposite side  hypotenuse    =    a  h     .
{\displaystyle \sin A={\frac {\text{opposite side}}{\text{hypotenuse}}}={\frac {a}{h}}\,.}
This ratio does not depend on the particular right triangle chosen, as long as it contains the angle A , since all those triangles are similar .
The cosine of an angle is the ratio of the length of the adjacent side to the length of the hypotenuse.
In our case      cos  ⁡  A  =    adjacent side  hypotenuse    =    b  h     .
{\displaystyle \cos A={\frac {\text{adjacent side}}{\text{hypotenuse}}}={\frac {b}{h}}\,.}
The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the length of the opposite side to the length of the adjacent side.
In our case      tan  ⁡  A  =    opposite  side  adjacent side    =    a  b    =     sin  ⁡  A    cos  ⁡  A      .
{\displaystyle \tan A={\frac {\text{opposite  side}}{\text{adjacent side}}}={\frac {a}{b}}={\frac {\sin A}{\cos A}}\,.}
The acronym " SOH-CAH-TOA " is a useful mnemonic for these ratios.
Inverse functions  The inverse trigonometric functions can be used to calculate the internal angles for a right angled triangle with the length of any two sides.
Arcsin can be used to calculate an angle from the length of the opposite side and the length of the hypotenuse.
θ  =  arcsin  ⁡   (    opposite side  hypotenuse    )     {\displaystyle \theta =\arcsin \left({\frac {\text{opposite side}}{\text{hypotenuse}}}\right)}    Arccos can be used to calculate an angle from the length of the adjacent side and the length of the hypotenuse.
θ  =  arccos  ⁡   (    adjacent side  hypotenuse    )     {\displaystyle \theta =\arccos \left({\frac {\text{adjacent side}}{\text{hypotenuse}}}\right)}    Arctan can be used to calculate an angle from the length of the opposite side and the length of the adjacent side.
θ  =  arctan  ⁡   (    opposite side  adjacent side    )     {\displaystyle \theta =\arctan \left({\frac {\text{opposite side}}{\text{adjacent side}}}\right)}    In introductory geometry and trigonometry courses, the notation sin −1 , cos −1 , etc., are often used in place of arcsin, arccos, etc.
However, the arcsin, arccos, etc., notation is standard in higher mathematics where trigonometric functions are commonly raised to powers, as this avoids confusion between multiplicative inverse and compositional inverse .
Sine, cosine and tangent rules  Main articles: Law of sines , Law of cosines , and Law of tangents  A triangle with sides of length a, b and c and angles of α, β and γ respectively.
The law of sines , or sine rule,  states that the ratio of the length of a side to the sine of its corresponding opposite angle is constant, that is        a   sin  ⁡  α     =    b   sin  ⁡  β     =    c   sin  ⁡  γ     =  2  R    {\displaystyle {\frac {a}{\sin \alpha }}={\frac {b}{\sin \beta }}={\frac {c}{\sin \gamma }}=2R}   , where R is the radius of the circumscribed circle of the given triangle.
Another interpretation of this theorem is that every triangle with angles α, β and γ is similar to a triangle with side lengths equal to sin α, sin β and sin γ.
This triangle can be constructed by first constructing a circle of diameter 1, and inscribing in it two of the angles of the triangle.
The length of the sides of that triangle will be sin α, sin β and sin γ.
The side whose length is sin α is opposite to the angle whose measure is α, etc.
The law of cosines , or cosine rule, connects the length of an unknown side of a triangle to the length of the other sides and the angle opposite to the unknown side.
As per the law: For a triangle with length of sides a , b , c and angles of α, β, γ respectively, given two known lengths of a triangle a and b , and the angle between the two known sides γ (or the angle opposite to the unknown side c ), to calculate the third side c , the following formula can be used:       c   2      =   a   2    +   b   2    −  2  a  b  cos  ⁡  (  γ  )    {\displaystyle c^{2}\ =a^{2}+b^{2}-2ab\cos(\gamma )}         b   2      =   a   2    +   c   2    −  2  a  c  cos  ⁡  (  β  )    {\displaystyle b^{2}\ =a^{2}+c^{2}-2ac\cos(\beta )}         a   2      =   b   2    +   c   2    −  2  b  c  cos  ⁡  (  α  )    {\displaystyle a^{2}\ =b^{2}+c^{2}-2bc\cos(\alpha )}    If the lengths of all three sides of any triangle are known the three angles can be calculated:      α  =  arccos  ⁡   (      b   2    +   c   2    −   a   2      2  b  c     )     {\displaystyle \alpha =\arccos \left({\frac {b^{2}+c^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc}}\right)}        β  =  arccos  ⁡   (      a   2    +   c   2    −   b   2      2  a  c     )     {\displaystyle \beta =\arccos \left({\frac {a^{2}+c^{2}-b^{2}}{2ac}}\right)}        γ  =  arccos  ⁡   (      a   2    +   b   2    −   c   2      2  a  b     )     {\displaystyle \gamma =\arccos \left({\frac {a^{2}+b^{2}-c^{2}}{2ab}}\right)}    The law of tangents , or tangent rule, can be used to find a side or an angle when two sides and an angle or two angles and a side are known.
It states that:           a  −  b    a  +  b     =     tan  ⁡      tan  ⁡       .
{\displaystyle {\frac {a-b}{a+b}}={\frac {\tan}{\tan}}.}
Solution of triangles  Main article: Solution of triangles  "Solution of triangles" is the main trigonometric problem: to find missing characteristics of a triangle (three angles, the lengths of the three sides etc.)
when at least three of these characteristics are given.
The triangle can be located on a plane or on a sphere .
This problem often occurs in various trigonometric applications, such as geodesy , astronomy , construction , navigation etc.
Area  This section is an excerpt from Area of a triangle .
The area of a triangle can be demonstrated, for example by means of the congruence of triangles , as half of the area of a parallelogram that has the same base length and height.
A graphic derivation of the formula     T  =    h  2    b    {\displaystyle T={\frac {h}{2}}b}   that avoids the usual procedure of doubling the area of the triangle and then halving it.
In geometry , calculating the area of a triangle is an elementary problem encountered often in many different situations.
The best known and simplest formula is     T  =  b  h   /   2  ,    {\displaystyle T=bh/2,}   where b is the length of the base of the triangle, and h is the height or altitude of the triangle.
The term "base" denotes any side, and "height" denotes the length of a perpendicular from the vertex opposite the base onto the line containing the base.
Euclid proved that the area of a triangle is half that of a parallelogram with the same base and height in his book Elements in 300 BCE.
In 499 CE Aryabhata , used this illustrated method in the Aryabhatiya (section 2.6).
Although simple, this formula is only useful if the height can be readily found, which is not always the case.
For example, the land surveyor of a triangular field might find it relatively easy to measure the length of each side, but relatively difficult to construct a 'height'.
Various methods may be used in practice, depending on what is known about the triangle.
Other frequently used formulas for the area of a triangle use trigonometry, side lengths (Heron's formula), vectors, coordinates, line integrals, Pick's theorem, or other properties.
Further formulas for general Euclidean triangles  See also: List of triangle inequalities  The formulas in this section are true for all Euclidean triangles.
Medians, angle bisectors, perpendicular side bisectors, and altitudes  Main articles: Median (geometry) , Angle bisector , Bisection § Perpendicular bisectors , and Altitude (geometry)  The medians and the sides are related by           3  4     (   a   2    +   b   2    +   c   2    )  =   m   a    2    +   m   b    2    +   m   c    2      {\displaystyle {\tfrac {3}{4}}(a^{2}+b^{2}+c^{2})=m_{a}^{2}+m_{b}^{2}+m_{c}^{2}}    and       m   a    =     1  2       2   b   2    +  2   c   2    −   a   2      =       1  2     (   a   2    +   b   2    +   c   2    )  −     3  4      a   2        {\displaystyle m_{a}={\tfrac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {2b^{2}+2c^{2}-a^{2}}}={\sqrt {{\tfrac {1}{2}}(a^{2}+b^{2}+c^{2})-{\tfrac {3}{4}}a^{2}}}}   ,  and equivalently for m b and m c .
For angle A opposite side a , the length of the internal angle bisector is given by         w   A    =     2    b  c  s  (  s  −  a  )      b  +  c     =    b  c        =     2  b  c    b  +  c     cos  ⁡    A  2    ,    {\displaystyle w_{A}={\frac {2{\sqrt {bcs(s-a)}}}{b+c}}={\sqrt {bc\left}}={\frac {2bc}{b+c}}\cos {\frac {A}{2}},}    for semiperimeter s , where the bisector length is measured from the vertex to where it meets the opposite side.
The interior perpendicular bisectors are given by       p   a    =     2  a  T     a   2    +   b   2    −   c   2       ,    {\displaystyle p_{a}={\frac {2aT}{a^{2}+b^{2}-c^{2}}},}         p   b    =     2  b  T     a   2    +   b   2    −   c   2       ,    {\displaystyle p_{b}={\frac {2bT}{a^{2}+b^{2}-c^{2}}},}         p   c    =     2  c  T     a   2    −   b   2    +   c   2       ,    {\displaystyle p_{c}={\frac {2cT}{a^{2}-b^{2}+c^{2}}},}    where the sides are     a  ≥  b  ≥  c    {\displaystyle a\geq b\geq c}   and the area is     T  .
{\displaystyle T.}    : Thm 2  The altitude from, for example, the side of length a is       h   a    =     2  T   a    .
{\displaystyle h_{a}={\frac {2T}{a}}.}
Circumradius and inradius  Main articles: Circumradius and Inradius  The following formulas involve the circumradius R and the inradius r :      R  =       a   2     b   2     c   2      (  a  +  b  +  c  )  (  −  a  +  b  +  c  )  (  a  −  b  +  c  )  (  a  +  b  −  c  )      ;    {\displaystyle R={\sqrt {\frac {a^{2}b^{2}c^{2}}{(a+b+c)(-a+b+c)(a-b+c)(a+b-c)}}};}        r  =      (  −  a  +  b  +  c  )  (  a  −  b  +  c  )  (  a  +  b  −  c  )    4  (  a  +  b  +  c  )      ;    {\displaystyle r={\sqrt {\frac {(-a+b+c)(a-b+c)(a+b-c)}{4(a+b+c)}}};}          1  r    =    1   h   a      +    1   h   b      +    1   h   c        {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{r}}={\frac {1}{h_{a}}}+{\frac {1}{h_{b}}}+{\frac {1}{h_{c}}}}    where h a etc.
are the altitudes to the subscripted sides;          r  R    =     4   T   2      s  a  b  c     =  cos  ⁡  α  +  cos  ⁡  β  +  cos  ⁡  γ  −  1  ;    {\displaystyle {\frac {r}{R}}={\frac {4T^{2}}{sabc}}=\cos \alpha +\cos \beta +\cos \gamma -1;}     and      2  R  r  =     a  b  c    a  +  b  +  c       {\displaystyle 2Rr={\frac {abc}{a+b+c}}}   .
The product of two sides of a triangle equals the altitude to the third side times the diameter D of the circumcircle:        a  b  =   h   c    D  ,    b  c  =   h   a    D  ,   c  a  =   h   b    D  .
{\displaystyle ab=h_{c}D,\quad \quad bc=h_{a}D,\quad ca=h_{b}D.}    Adjacent triangles  Suppose two adjacent but non-overlapping triangles share the same side of length f and share the same circumcircle, so that the side of length f is a chord of the circumcircle and the triangles have side lengths ( a , b , f ) and ( c , d , f ), with the two triangles together forming a cyclic quadrilateral with side lengths in sequence ( a , b , c , d ).
Then         f   2    =     (  a  c  +  b  d  )  (  a  d  +  b  c  )    (  a  b  +  c  d  )     .
{\displaystyle f^{2}={\frac {(ac+bd)(ad+bc)}{(ab+cd)}}.\,}    Centroid  Main article: Centroid  Let G be the centroid of a triangle with vertices A , B , and C , and let P be any interior point.
Then the distances between the points are related by        (  P  A   )   2    +  (  P  B   )   2    +  (  P  C   )   2    =  (  G  A   )   2    +  (  G  B   )   2    +  (  G  C   )   2    +  3  (  P  G   )   2    .
{\displaystyle (PA)^{2}+(PB)^{2}+(PC)^{2}=(GA)^{2}+(GB)^{2}+(GC)^{2}+3(PG)^{2}.\,}    The sum of the squares of the triangle's sides equals three times the sum of the squared distances of the centroid from the vertices:      A   B   2    +  B   C   2    +  C   A   2    =  3  (  G   A   2    +  G   B   2    +  G   C   2    )  .
{\displaystyle AB^{2}+BC^{2}+CA^{2}=3(GA^{2}+GB^{2}+GC^{2}).}
Let q a , q b , and q c be the distances from the centroid to the sides of lengths a , b , and c .
Then           q   a     q   b      =    b  a    ,       q   b     q   c      =    c  b    ,       q   a     q   c      =    c  a       {\displaystyle {\frac {q_{a}}{q_{b}}}={\frac {b}{a}},\quad \quad {\frac {q_{b}}{q_{c}}}={\frac {c}{b}},\quad \quad {\frac {q_{a}}{q_{c}}}={\frac {c}{a}}\,}    and       q   a    ⋅  a  =   q   b    ⋅  b  =   q   c    ⋅  c  =    2  3    T     {\displaystyle q_{a}\cdot a=q_{b}\cdot b=q_{c}\cdot c={\frac {2}{3}}T\,}    for area T .
Circumcenter, incenter, and orthocenter  Main articles: Circumcenter , Incenter , and Orthocenter  Carnot's theorem states that the sum of the distances from the circumcenter to the three sides equals the sum of the circumradius and the inradius.
Here a segment's length is considered to be negative if and only if the segment lies entirely outside the triangle.
This method is especially useful for deducing the properties of more abstract forms of triangles, such as the ones induced by Lie algebras , that otherwise have the same properties as usual triangles.
Euler's theorem states that the distance d between the circumcenter and the incenter is given by          d   2    =  R  (  R  −  2  r  )     {\displaystyle \displaystyle d^{2}=R(R-2r)}    or equivalently        1   R  −  d     +    1   R  +  d     =    1  r    ,    {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{R-d}}+{\frac {1}{R+d}}={\frac {1}{r}},}    where R is the circumradius and r is the inradius.
Thus for all triangles R ≥ 2 r , with equality holding for equilateral triangles.
If we denote that the orthocenter divides one altitude into segments of lengths u and v , another altitude into segment lengths w and x , and the third altitude into segment lengths y and z , then uv = wx = yz .
The distance from a side to the circumcenter equals half the distance from the opposite vertex to the orthocenter.
The sum of the squares of the distances from the vertices to the orthocenter H plus the sum of the squares of the sides equals twelve times the square of the circumradius:        A   H   2    +  B   H   2    +  C   H   2    +   a   2    +   b   2    +   c   2    =  12   R   2    .
{\displaystyle AH^{2}+BH^{2}+CH^{2}+a^{2}+b^{2}+c^{2}=12R^{2}.}
Angles  In addition to the law of sines ,  the law of cosines , the law of tangents , and the trigonometric existence conditions given earlier, for any triangle      a  =  b  cos  ⁡  C  +  c  cos  ⁡  B  ,   b  =  c  cos  ⁡  A  +  a  cos  ⁡  C  ,   c  =  a  cos  ⁡  B  +  b  cos  ⁡  A  .
{\displaystyle a=b\cos C+c\cos B,\quad b=c\cos A+a\cos C,\quad c=a\cos B+b\cos A.}
Morley's trisector theorem  Main article: Morley's trisector theorem  The Morley triangle, resulting from the trisection of each interior angle.
This is an example of a finite subdivision rule .
Morley's trisector theorem states that in any triangle, the three points of intersection of the adjacent angle trisectors form an equilateral triangle, called the Morley triangle.
Figures inscribed in a triangle  Conics  As discussed above, every triangle has a unique inscribed circle (incircle) that is interior to the triangle and tangent to all three sides.
Every triangle has a unique Steiner inellipse which is interior to the triangle and tangent at the midpoints of the sides.
Marden's theorem shows how to find the foci of this ellipse .
This ellipse has the greatest area of any ellipse tangent to all three sides of the triangle.
The Mandart inellipse of a triangle is the ellipse inscribed within the triangle tangent to its sides at the contact points of its excircles.
For any ellipse inscribed in a triangle ABC , let the foci be P and Q .
Then              P  A   ¯    ⋅     Q  A   ¯         C  A   ¯    ⋅     A  B   ¯       +        P  B   ¯    ⋅     Q  B   ¯         A  B   ¯    ⋅     B  C   ¯       +        P  C   ¯    ⋅     Q  C   ¯         B  C   ¯    ⋅     C  A   ¯       =  1.
{\displaystyle {\frac {{\overline {PA}}\cdot {\overline {QA}}}{{\overline {CA}}\cdot {\overline {AB}}}}+{\frac {{\overline {PB}}\cdot {\overline {QB}}}{{\overline {AB}}\cdot {\overline {BC}}}}+{\frac {{\overline {PC}}\cdot {\overline {QC}}}{{\overline {BC}}\cdot {\overline {CA}}}}=1.}
Convex polygon  Every convex polygon with area T can be inscribed in a triangle of area at most equal to 2 T .
Equality holds (exclusively) for a parallelogram .
Hexagon  The Lemoine hexagon is a cyclic hexagon with vertices given by the six intersections of the sides of a triangle with the three lines that are parallel to the sides and that pass through its symmedian point .
In either its simple form or its self-intersecting form , the Lemoine hexagon is interior to the triangle with two vertices on each side of the triangle.
Squares  Every acute triangle has three inscribed squares (squares in its interior such that all four of a square's vertices lie on a side of the triangle, so two of them lie on the same side and hence one side of the square coincides with part of a side of the triangle).
In a right triangle two of the squares coincide and have a vertex at the triangle's right angle, so a right triangle has only two distinct inscribed squares.
An obtuse triangle has only one inscribed square, with a side coinciding with part of the triangle's longest side.
Within a given triangle, a longer common side is associated with a smaller inscribed square.
If an inscribed square has side of length q a and the triangle has a side of length a , part of which side coincides with a side of the square, then q a , a , the altitude h a from the side a , and the triangle's area T are related according to          q   a    =     2  T  a     a   2    +  2  T     =     a   h   a      a  +   h   a       .
{\displaystyle q_{a}={\frac {2Ta}{a^{2}+2T}}={\frac {ah_{a}}{a+h_{a}}}.}
The largest possible ratio of the area of the inscribed square to the area of the triangle is 1/2, which occurs when a 2 = 2 T , q = a /2 , and the altitude of the triangle from the base of length a is equal to a .
The smallest possible ratio of the side of one inscribed square to the side of another in the same non-obtuse triangle is     2    2     /   3  =  0.94....
   {\displaystyle 2{\sqrt {2}}/3=0.94....}    Both of these extreme cases occur for the isosceles right triangle.
Triangles  From an interior point in a reference triangle, the nearest points on the three sides serve as the vertices of the pedal triangle of that point.
If the interior point is the circumcenter of the reference triangle, the vertices of the pedal triangle are the midpoints of the reference triangle's sides, and so the pedal triangle is called the midpoint triangle or medial triangle.
The midpoint triangle subdivides the reference triangle into four congruent triangles which are similar to the reference triangle.
The Gergonne triangle or intouch triangle of a reference triangle has its vertices at the three points of tangency of the reference triangle's sides with its incircle.
The extouch triangle of a reference triangle has its vertices at the points of tangency of the reference triangle's excircles with its sides (not extended).
Figures circumscribed about a triangle  The tangential triangle of a reference triangle (other than a right triangle) is the triangle whose sides are on the tangent lines to the reference triangle's circumcircle at its vertices.
As mentioned above, every triangle has a unique circumcircle, a circle passing through all three vertices, whose center is the intersection of the  perpendicular bisectors of the triangle's sides.
Further, every triangle has a unique Steiner circumellipse , which passes through the triangle's vertices and has its center at the triangle's centroid.
Of all ellipses going through the triangle's vertices, it has the smallest area.
The Kiepert hyperbola is the unique conic which passes through the triangle's three vertices, its centroid, and its circumcenter.
Of all triangles contained in a given convex polygon , one with maximal area can be found in linear time; its vertices may be chosen as three of the vertices of the given polygon.
Specifying the location of a point in a triangle  One way to identify locations of points in (or outside) a triangle is to place the triangle in an arbitrary location and orientation in the Cartesian plane , and to use Cartesian coordinates.
While convenient for many purposes, this approach has the disadvantage of all points' coordinate values being dependent on the arbitrary placement in the plane.
Two systems avoid that feature, so that the coordinates of a point are not affected by moving the triangle, rotating it, or reflecting it as in a mirror, any of which give a congruent triangle, or even by rescaling it to give a similar triangle:  Trilinear coordinates specify the relative distances of a point from the sides, so that coordinates     x  :  y  :  z    {\displaystyle x:y:z}   indicate that the ratio of the distance of the point from the first side to its distance from the second side is     x  :  y    {\displaystyle x:y}   , etc.
Barycentric coordinates of the form     α  :  β  :  γ    {\displaystyle \alpha :\beta :\gamma }   specify the point's location by the relative weights that would have to be put on the three vertices in order to balance the otherwise weightless triangle on the given point.
Non-planar triangles  A non-planar triangle is a triangle which is not contained in a Euclidean plane .
Some examples of non-planar triangles in non-Euclidean geometries are spherical triangles in spherical geometry and hyperbolic triangles in hyperbolic geometry .
While the measures of the internal angles in planar triangles always sum to 180°, a hyperbolic triangle has measures of angles that sum to less than 180°, and a spherical triangle has measures of angles that sum to more than 180°.
A hyperbolic triangle can be obtained by drawing on a negatively curved surface, such as a saddle surface , and a spherical triangle can be obtained by drawing on a positively curved surface such as a sphere .
Thus, if one draws a giant triangle on the surface of the Earth, one will find that the sum of the measures of its angles is greater than 180°; in fact it will be between 180° and 540°.
In particular it is possible to draw a triangle on a sphere such that the measure of each of its internal angles is equal to 90°, adding up to a total of 270°.
Specifically, on a sphere the sum of the angles of a triangle is  180° × (1 + 4 f ),  where f is the fraction of the sphere's area which is enclosed by the triangle.
For example, suppose that we draw a triangle on the Earth's surface with vertices at the North Pole, at a point on the equator at 0° longitude , and a point on the equator at 90° West longitude .
The great circle line between the latter two points is the equator, and the great circle line between either of those points and the North Pole is a line of longitude; so there are right angles at the two points on the equator.
Moreover, the angle at the North Pole is also 90° because the other two vertices differ by 90° of longitude.
So the sum of the angles in this triangle is 90° + 90° + 90° = 270° .
The triangle encloses 1/4 of the northern hemisphere (90°/360° as viewed from the North Pole) and therefore 1/8 of the Earth's surface, so in the formula f = 1/8 ; thus the formula correctly gives the sum of the triangle's angles as 270°.
From the above angle sum formula we can also see that the Earth's surface is locally flat: If we draw an arbitrarily small triangle in the neighborhood of one point on the Earth's surface, the fraction f of the Earth's surface which is enclosed by the triangle will be arbitrarily close to zero.
In this case the angle sum formula simplifies to 180°, which we know is what Euclidean geometry tells us for triangles on a flat surface.
Triangles in construction  Main article: Truss  The Flatiron Building in New York is shaped like a triangular prism  Rectangles have been the most popular and common geometric form for buildings since the shape is easy to stack and organize; as a standard, it is easy to design furniture and fixtures to fit inside rectangularly shaped buildings.
But triangles, while more difficult to use conceptually, provide a great deal of strength.
As computer technology helps architects design creative new buildings, triangular shapes are becoming increasingly prevalent as parts of buildings and as the primary shape for some types of skyscrapers as well as building materials.
In Tokyo in 1989, architects had wondered whether it was possible to build a 500-story tower to provide affordable office space for this densely packed city, but with the danger to buildings from earthquakes , architects considered that a triangular shape would be necessary if such a building were to be built.
In New York City , as Broadway crisscrosses major avenues, the resulting blocks are cut like triangles, and buildings have been built on these shapes; one such building is the triangularly shaped Flatiron Building which real estate people admit has a "warren of awkward spaces that do not easily accommodate modern office furniture" but that has not prevented the structure from becoming a landmark icon.
Designers have made houses in Norway using triangular themes.
Triangle shapes have appeared in churches  as well as public buildings including colleges  as well as supports for innovative home designs.
Triangles are sturdy; while a rectangle can collapse into a parallelogram from pressure to one of its points, triangles have a natural strength which supports structures against lateral pressures.
A triangle will not change shape unless its sides are bent or extended or broken or if its joints break; in essence, each of the three sides supports the other two.
A rectangle, in contrast, is more dependent on the strength of its joints in a structural sense.
Some innovative designers have proposed making bricks not out of rectangles, but with triangular shapes which can be combined in three dimensions.
It is likely that triangles will be used increasingly in new ways as architecture increases in complexity.
Triangles are strong in terms of rigidity, but while packed in a tessellating arrangement triangles are not as strong as hexagons under compression (hence the prevalence of hexagonal forms in nature ).
Tessellated triangles still maintain superior strength for cantilevering however, and this is the basis for one of the strongest man made structures, the tetrahedral truss .
Pre-2nd century AD Chinese treatise  You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Chinese .
(May 2018)  Click  for important translation instructions.
View a machine-translated version of the Chinese article.
Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 338 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality.
If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation.
A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Chinese Wikipedia article at ]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|zh|周髀算經}} to the talk page .
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .
Zhoubi Suanjing The Gougu Theorem diagram added to the Zhoubi by Zhao Shuang Zhoubi Suanjing Traditional Chinese 周 髀 算 經 Simplified Chinese 周 髀 算 经 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōubì suànjīng Wade–Giles Chou-pi Suan-ching Zhoubi Chinese 周 髀 Literal meaning The Zhou gnomon On gnomons and circular paths Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōubì Wade–Giles Chou-pi Zhoubi Traditional Chinese 算 經 Simplified Chinese 算 经 Literal meaning Classic of computation Arithmetic classic Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Suànjīng Wade–Giles Suan-ching   The Zhoubi Suanjing , also known by many other names , is an ancient Chinese astronomical and mathematical work.
The Zhoubi is most famous for its presentation of Chinese cosmology and a form of the Pythagorean theorem .
It claims to present 246 problems worked out by the Duke of Zhou as well as members of his court, placing its composition during the 11th century BC.
However, the present form of the book does not seem to be earlier than the Eastern Han (25–220 AD), with some additions and commentaries continuing to be added for several more centuries.
Names   The work's original title was simply the Zhoubi : the character 髀 is a literary term for the femur or thighbone but in context only refers to one or more gnomons , large sticks whose shadows were used for Chinese calendrical and astronomical calculations .
Because of the ambiguous nature of the character 周 , it has been alternately understood and translated as 'On the gnomon and the circular paths of Heaven ',  the 'Zhou shadow gauge manual',  the 'Gnomon of the Zhou sundial',  and 'Gnomon of the Zhou dynasty '.
The honorific Suanjing —'Arithmetical classic',  'Sacred book of arithmetic',  'Mathematical canon',  'Classic of computations',  —was added later.
Dating   Examples of the gnomon described in the work have been found from as early as 2300 BC and the Duke of Zhou , was an 11th-century BC regent and noble during the first generation of the Zhou dynasty .
The Zhoubi was traditionally dated to the Duke of Zhou's own life  and considered to be the oldest Chinese mathematical treatise.
However, although some passages seem to come from the Warring States period or earlier,  the current text of the work mentions Lü Buwei and is believed to have received its current form no earlier than the Eastern Han , during the 1st or 2nd century.
The earliest known mention of the text is from a memorial dedicated to the astronomer Cai Yong in 178 AD.
It does not appear at all in the Book of Han 's account of calendrical, astronomical, and mathematical works, although Joseph Needham allows that this may have been from its current contents having previously been provided in several different works listed in the Han history which are otherwise unknown.
Contents   A umbrella-covered chariot from the terracotta army of the tomb of Qin Shi Huang (2006)  The Zhoubi is an anonymous collection of 246 problems  encountered by the Duke of Zhou and figures in his court, including the astrologer Shang Gao.
Each problem includes an answer and a corresponding arithmetic algorithm .
It is an important source on early Chinese cosmology , glossing the ancient idea of a round heaven over a square earth ( 天 圆 地 方 , tiānyuán dìfāng ) as similar to the round parasol suspended over some ancient Chinese chariots  or a Chinese chessboard .
All things measurable were considered variants of the square , while the expansion of a polygon to infinite sides approaches the immeasurable circle .
This concept of a 'canopy heaven' ( 蓋 天 , gàitiān ) had earlier produced the jade bi ( 璧 ) and cong objects and myths about Gonggong , Mount Buzhou , Nüwa , and repairing the sky .
Although this eventually developed into an idea of a 'spherical heaven' ( 渾 天 , hùntiān ),  the Zhoubi offers numerous explorations of the geometric relationships of simple circles circumscribed by squares and squares circumscribed by circles .
A large part of this involves analysis of solar declination in the Northern Hemisphere at various points throughout the year.
At one point during its discussion of the shadows cast by gnomons, the work presents a form of the Pythagorean theorem known as the gougu theorem ( 勾股 定理 )  from the Chinese names—lit.
'hook' and 'thigh'—of the two sides of the carpenter or try square .
In the 3rd century, Zhao Shuang's commentary on the Zhoubi included a diagram effectively proving the theorem  for the case of a 3-4-5 triangle ,  whence it can be generalized to all right triangles .
The original text being ambiguous on its own, there is disagreement as to whether this proof was established by Zhao or merely represented an illustration of a previously understood concept earlier than Pythagoras .
Shang Gao concludes the gougu problem saying "He who understands the earth is a wise man, and he who understands the heavens is a sage.
Knowledge is derived from the shadow , and the shadow is derived from the gnomon .
The combination of the gnomon with numbers is what guides and rules the ten thousand things."
Commentaries   The Zhoubi has had a prominent place in Chinese mathematics and was the subject of specific commentaries by Zhao Shuang in the 3rd century, Liu Hui in 263, by Zu Gengzhi in the early 6th century, Li Chunfeng in the 7th century, and Yang Hui in 1270.
Translation   A translation to English was published in 1996 by Christopher Cullen, through the Cambridge University Press, entitled Astronomy and mathematics in ancient China: the Zhou bi suan jing .
The work includes a preface attributed to Zhao Shuang, as well as his discussions and diagrams for the gougu theorem, the height of the sun, the seven heng and his gnomon shadow table, restored.
Optical illusion  Animation of the missing square puzzle, showing the two arrangements of the pieces and the "missing" square  Both "total triangles" are in a perfect 13×5 grid; and both the "component triangles", the blue in a 5×2 grid and the red in an 8×3 grid.
The missing square puzzle is an optical illusion used in mathematics classes to help students reason about geometrical figures; or rather to teach them not to reason using figures, but to use only textual descriptions and the axioms of geometry.
It depicts two arrangements made of similar shapes in slightly different configurations.
Each apparently forms a 13×5 right-angled triangle , but one has a 1×1 hole in it.
Solution   What the "magician presentation" does not show.
The angles of the hypotenuses aren't the same: they are not similar triangles .
It is fairly trivial to prove that the triangles must be dissimilar for this form of the puzzle to work in the plane.
Splitting the thin parallelogram area (yellow) into little parts, and building a single unit square with them  The key to the puzzle is the fact that neither of the 13×5 "triangles" is truly a triangle, nor would either truly be 13x5 if it were, because what appears to be the hypotenuse is bent.
In other words, the "hypotenuse" does not maintain a consistent slope , even though it may appear that way to the human eye.
There are two distinct and "false hypotenuses" for the total triangle.
A true 13×5 triangle cannot be created from the given component parts.
The four figures (the yellow, red, blue and green shapes) total 32 units of area.
The apparent triangles formed from the figures are 13 units wide and 5 units tall, so it appears that the area should be S = 13×5 / 2 = 32.5 units.
However, the blue triangle has a ratio of 5:2 (=2.5), while the red triangle has the ratio 8:3 (≈2.667), so the apparent combined hypotenuse in each figure is actually bent.
With the bent hypotenuse, the first figure actually occupies a combined 32 units, while the second figure occupies 33, including the "missing" square.
The amount of bending is approximately 1 / 28 unit (1.245364267°), which is difficult to see on the diagram of the puzzle, and was illustrated as a graphic.
Note the grid point where the red and blue triangles in the lower image meet (5 squares to the right and two units up from the lower left corner of the combined figure), and compare it to the same point on the other figure; the edge is slightly under the mark in the upper image, but goes through it in the lower.
Overlaying the "hypotenuses" from both figures results in a very thin parallelogram (represented with the four red dots) with an area of exactly one grid square ( Pick's theorem gives 0   + 4   / 2 − 1 = 1), so the "missing" area.
Principle   More obvious using Fibonacci ratios 1:2 and 2:3  According to Martin Gardner ,  this particular puzzle was invented by a New York City amateur magician, Paul Curry , in 1953.
However, the principle of a dissection paradox has been known since the start of the 16th century.
The integer dimensions of the parts of the puzzle (2, 3, 5, 8, 13) are successive Fibonacci numbers , which leads to the exact unit area in the thin parallelogram .
Many other geometric dissection puzzles are based on a few simple properties of the Fibonacci sequence.
Similar puzzles   A variant of Mitsunobu Matsuyama's "paradox"  Sam Loyd 's paradoxical dissection  Sam Loyd 's chessboard paradox demonstrates two rearrangements of an 8×8 square.
In the "larger" rearrangement (the 5×13 rectangle in the image to the right), the gaps between the figures have a combined unit square more area than their square gaps counterparts, creating an illusion that the figures there take up more space than those in the original square figure.
In the "smaller" rearrangement (the shape below the 5×13 rectangle), each quadrilateral needs to overlap the triangle by an area of half a unit for its top/bottom edge to align with a grid line, resulting overall loss in one unit square area.
Mitsunobu Matsuyama's "paradox" uses four congruent quadrilaterals and a small square, which form a larger square.
When the quadrilaterals are rotated about their centers they fill the space of the small square, although the total area of the figure seems unchanged.
The apparent paradox is explained by the fact that the side of the new large square is a little smaller than the original one.
If θ is the angle between two opposing sides in each quadrilateral, then the ratio of the two areas is given by sec 2  θ .
For θ = 5°, this is approximately 1.00765, which corresponds to a difference of about 0.8%.
Interactive SVG of The Disappearing Bicyclist – in the SVG file, move the pointer to rotate the disc  A vanishing puzzle is a mechanical optical illusion showing different numbers of a certain object when parts of the puzzle are moved around.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "In mathematics , an elementary proof is a mathematical proof that only uses basic techniques.
Historically, it was once thought that certain theorems , like the prime number theorem , could only be proved by invoking "higher" mathematical theorems or techniques.
However, as time progresses, many of these results have also been subsequently reproven using only elementary techniques.
While there is generally no consensus as to what counts as elementary, the term is nevertheless a common part of the mathematical jargon .
An elementary proof is not necessarily simple, in the sense of being easy to understand or trivial.
In fact, some elementary proofs can be quite complicated — and this is especially true when a statement of notable importance is involved.
Prime number theorem   The distinction between elementary and non-elementary proofs has been considered especially important in regard to the prime number theorem .
This theorem was first proved in 1896 by Jacques Hadamard and Charles Jean de la Vallée-Poussin using complex analysis.
Many mathematicians then attempted to construct elementary proofs of the theorem, without success.
G.
H.
Hardy expressed strong reservations; he considered that the essential " depth " of the result ruled out elementary proofs:  No elementary proof of the prime number theorem is known, and one may ask whether it is reasonable to expect one.
Now we know that the theorem is roughly equivalent to a theorem about an analytic function , the theorem that Riemann's zeta function has no roots on a certain line .
A proof of such a theorem, not fundamentally dependent on the theory of functions, seems to me extraordinarily unlikely.
It is rash to assert that a mathematical theorem cannot be proved in a particular way; but one thing seems quite clear.
We have certain views about the logic of the theory; we think that some theorems, as we say "lie deep" and others nearer to the surface.
If anyone produces an elementary proof of the prime number theorem, he will show that these views are wrong, that the subject does not hang together in the way we have supposed, and that it is time for the books to be cast aside and for the theory to be rewritten.
— G.
H.
Hardy (1921).
Lecture to Mathematical Society of Copenhagen.
Quoted in Goldfeld (2003), p.
3   However, in 1948, Atle Selberg produced new methods which led him and Paul Erdős to find elementary proofs of the prime number theorem.
Friedman's conjecture   Main article: Grand conjecture  Harvey Friedman  conjectured , "Every theorem published in the Annals of Mathematics whose statement involves only finitary mathematical objects (i.e., what logicians call an arithmetical statement) can be proved in elementary arithmetic."
The form of elementary arithmetic referred to in this conjecture can be formalized by a small set of axioms concerning integer arithmetic and mathematical induction .
For instance, according to this conjecture, Fermat's Last Theorem should have an elementary proof; Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is not elementary.
However, there are other simple statements about arithmetic such as the existence of iterated exponential functions that cannot be proven in this theory.
References     ^  Diamond, Harold G.
(1982), "Elementary methods in the study of the distribution of prime numbers", Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , 7 (3): 553–89, doi : 10.1090/S0273-0979-1982-15057-1 , MR  0670132 .
^  Zagier, Don.
"Newman's Short Proof of the Prime Number Theorem"  (PDF) .
Archived  (PDF) from the original on 2014-07-14.
^ a  b  Goldfeld, Dorian M.
(2003), The Elementary Proof of the Prime Number Theorem: An Historical Perspective  (PDF) , p.
3 , retrieved October 31, 2009   ^  Avigad, Jeremy (2003), "Number theory and elementary arithmetic"  (PDF) , Philosophia Mathematica , 11 (3): 257, at 258, doi : 10.1093/philmat/11.3.257 .
v t e Mathematical logic General  Axiom  list  Cardinality  First-order logic  Formal proof  Formal semantics  Foundations of mathematics  Information theory  Lemma  Logical consequence  Model  Theorem  Theory  Type theory  Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes  Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems  Tarski's undefinability  Banach–Tarski paradox  Cantor's theorem,  paradox and diagonal argument  Compactness  Halting problem  Lindström's  Löwenheim–Skolem  Russell's paradox  Logics Traditional  Classical logic  Logical truth  Tautology  Proposition  Inference  Logical equivalence  Consistency  Equiconsistency  Argument  Soundness  Validity  Syllogism  Square of opposition  Venn diagram  Propositional  Boolean algebra  Boolean functions  Logical connectives  Propositional calculus  Propositional formula  Truth tables  Many-valued logic  3  finite  ∞  Predicate  First-order  list  Second-order  Monadic  Higher-order  Fixed-point  Free  Quantifiers  Predicate  Monadic predicate calculus  Set theory  Set  hereditary  Class  ( Ur- ) Element  Ordinal number  Extensionality  Forcing  Relation  equivalence  partition  Set operations: intersection  union  complement  Cartesian product  power set  identities  Types of sets  Countable  Uncountable  Empty  Inhabited  Singleton  Finite  Infinite  Transitive  Ultrafilter  Recursive  Fuzzy  Universal  Universe  constructible  Grothendieck  Von Neumann  Maps and cardinality  Function / Map  domain  codomain  image  In / Sur / Bi -jection  Schröder–Bernstein theorem  Isomorphism  Gödel numbering  Enumeration  Large cardinal  inaccessible  Aleph number  Operation  binary  Set theories  Zermelo–Fraenkel  axiom of choice  continuum hypothesis  General  Kripke–Platek  Morse–Kelley  Naive  New Foundations  Tarski–Grothendieck  Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel  Ackermann  Constructive  Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax  Alphabet  Arity  Automata  Axiom schema  Expression  ground  Extension  by definition  conservative  Relation  Formation rule  Grammar  Formula  atomic  closed  ground  open  Free/bound variable  Language  Metalanguage  Logical connective  ¬  ∨  ∧  →  ↔  =  Predicate  functional  variable  propositional variable  Proof  Quantifier  ∃  !
∀  rank  Sentence  atomic  spectrum  Signature  String  Substitution  Symbol  function  logical/constant  non-logical  variable  Term  Theory  list  Example axiomatic systems  ( list )  of arithmetic : Peano  second-order  elementary function  primitive recursive  Robinson  Skolem  of the real numbers  Tarski's axiomatization  of Boolean algebras  canonical  minimal axioms  of geometry : Euclidean : Elements  Hilbert's  Tarski's  non-Euclidean  Principia Mathematica  Proof theory  Formal proof  Natural deduction  Logical consequence  Rule of inference  Sequent calculus  Theorem  Systems  axiomatic  deductive  Hilbert  list  Complete theory  Independence ( from ZFC )  Proof of impossibility  Ordinal analysis  Reverse mathematics  Self-verifying theories  Model theory  Interpretation  function  of models  Model  equivalence  finite  saturated  spectrum  submodel  Non-standard model  of arithmetic  Diagram  elementary  Categorical theory  Model complete theory  Satisfiability  Semantics of logic  Strength  Theories of truth  semantic  Tarski's  Kripke's  T-schema  Transfer principle  Truth predicate  Truth value  Type  Ultraproduct  Validity  Computability theory  Church encoding  Church–Turing thesis  Computably enumerable  Computable function  Computable set  Decision problem  decidable  undecidable  P  NP  P versus NP problem  Kolmogorov complexity  Lambda calculus  Primitive recursive function  Recursion  Recursive set  Turing machine  Type theory  Related  Abstract logic  Algebraic logic  Automated theorem proving  Category theory  Concrete / Abstract category  Category of sets  History of logic  History of mathematical logic  timeline  Logicism  Mathematical object  Philosophy of mathematics  Supertask   Mathematics portal      Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elementary_proof&oldid=1213260860 "Branch of mathematics studying functions of a complex variable  Not to be confused with Complexity theory .
( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Mathematical analysis → Complex analysis Complex analysis  Complex numbers  Real number  Imaginary number  Complex plane  Complex conjugate  Unit complex number   Complex functions  Complex-valued function  Analytic function  Holomorphic function  Cauchy–Riemann equations  Formal power series   Basic theory  Zeros and poles  Cauchy's integral theorem  Local primitive  Cauchy's integral formula  Winding number  Laurent series  Isolated singularity  Residue theorem  Conformal map  Schwarz lemma  Harmonic function  Laplace's equation   Geometric function theory  People  Augustin-Louis Cauchy  Leonhard Euler  Carl Friedrich Gauss  Jacques Hadamard  Kiyoshi Oka  Bernhard Riemann  Karl Weierstrass    Mathematics portal v t e  Complex analysis , traditionally known as the theory of functions of a complex variable , is the branch of mathematical analysis that investigates functions of complex numbers .
It is helpful in many branches of mathematics, including algebraic geometry , number theory , analytic combinatorics , and applied mathematics , as well as in physics , including the branches of hydrodynamics , thermodynamics , quantum mechanics , and twistor theory .
By extension, use of complex analysis also has applications in engineering fields such as nuclear , aerospace , mechanical and electrical engineering .
As a differentiable function of a complex variable is equal to its Taylor series (that is, it is analytic ), complex analysis is particularly concerned with analytic functions of a complex variable, that is, holomorphic functions .
The concept can be extended to functions of several complex variables .
History   Augustin-Louis Cauchy , one of the founders of complex analysis  Complex analysis is one of the classical branches in mathematics, with roots in the 18th century and just prior.
Important mathematicians associated with complex numbers include Euler , Gauss , Riemann , Cauchy , Gösta Mittag-Leffler , Weierstrass , and many more in the 20th century.
Complex analysis, in particular the theory of conformal mappings , has many physical applications and is also used throughout analytic number theory .
In modern times, it has become very popular through a new boost from complex dynamics and the pictures of fractals produced by iterating holomorphic functions .
Another important application of complex analysis is in string theory which examines conformal invariants in quantum field theory .
Complex functions   An exponential function A n of a discrete ( integer ) variable n , similar to geometric progression  A complex function is a function from complex numbers to complex numbers.
In other words, it is a function that has a subset of the complex numbers as a domain and the complex numbers as a codomain .
Complex functions are generally assumed to have a domain that contains a nonempty open subset of the complex plane .
For any complex function, the values     z    {\displaystyle z}   from the domain and their images     f  (  z  )    {\displaystyle f(z)}   in the range may be separated into real and imaginary parts:      z  =  x  +  i  y    and    f  (  z  )  =  f  (  x  +  i  y  )  =  u  (  x  ,  y  )  +  i  v  (  x  ,  y  )  ,    {\displaystyle z=x+iy\quad {\text{ and }}\quad f(z)=f(x+iy)=u(x,y)+iv(x,y),}    where     x  ,  y  ,  u  (  x  ,  y  )  ,  v  (  x  ,  y  )    {\displaystyle x,y,u(x,y),v(x,y)}   are all real-valued.
In other words, a complex function     f  :   C   →   C     {\displaystyle f:\mathbb {C} \to \mathbb {C} }   may be decomposed into      u  :    R    2    →   R      {\displaystyle u:\mathbb {R} ^{2}\to \mathbb {R} \quad }   and      v  :    R    2    →   R   ,    {\displaystyle \quad v:\mathbb {R} ^{2}\to \mathbb {R} ,}    i.e., into two real-valued functions (     u    {\displaystyle u}   ,     v    {\displaystyle v}   ) of two real variables (     x    {\displaystyle x}   ,     y    {\displaystyle y}   ).
Similarly, any complex-valued function f on an arbitrary set  X (is isomorphic to, and therefore, in that sense, it) can be considered as an ordered pair of two real-valued functions : (Re f , Im f ) or, alternatively, as a vector-valued function from X into       R    2    .
{\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{2}.}
Some properties of complex-valued functions (such as continuity ) are nothing more than the corresponding properties of vector valued functions of two real variables.
Other concepts of complex analysis, such as differentiability , are direct generalizations of the similar concepts for real functions, but may have very different properties.
In particular, every differentiable complex function is analytic (see next section), and two differentiable functions that are equal in a neighborhood of a point are equal on the intersection of their domain (if the domains are connected ).
The latter property is the basis of the principle of analytic continuation which allows extending every real analytic function in a unique way for getting a complex analytic function whose domain is the whole complex plane with a finite number of curve arcs removed.
Many basic and special complex functions are defined in this way, including the complex exponential function , complex logarithm functions , and trigonometric functions .
Holomorphic functions   Main article: Holomorphic function  Complex functions that are differentiable at every point of an open subset      Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   of the complex plane are said to be holomorphic on      Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   .
In the context of complex analysis, the derivative of     f    {\displaystyle f}   at      z   0      {\displaystyle z_{0}}   is defined to be         f  ′   (   z   0    )  =   lim   z  →   z   0         f  (  z  )  −  f  (   z   0    )    z  −   z   0       .
{\displaystyle f'(z_{0})=\lim _{z\to z_{0}}{\frac {f(z)-f(z_{0})}{z-z_{0}}}.}
Superficially, this definition is formally analogous to that of the derivative of a real function.
However, complex derivatives and differentiable functions behave in significantly different ways compared to their real counterparts.
In particular, for this limit to exist, the value of the difference quotient must approach the same complex number, regardless of the manner in which we approach      z   0      {\displaystyle z_{0}}   in the complex plane.
Consequently, complex differentiability has much stronger implications than real differentiability.
For instance, holomorphic functions are infinitely differentiable , whereas the existence of the n th derivative need not imply the existence of the ( n + 1)th derivative for real functions.
Furthermore, all holomorphic functions satisfy the stronger condition of analyticity , meaning that the function is, at every point in its domain, locally given by a convergent power series.
In essence, this means that functions holomorphic on     Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   can be approximated arbitrarily well by polynomials in some neighborhood of every point in     Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   .
This stands in sharp contrast to differentiable real functions; there are infinitely differentiable real functions that are nowhere analytic; see Non-analytic smooth function § A smooth function which is nowhere real analytic .
Most elementary functions, including the exponential function , the trigonometric functions , and all polynomial functions , extended appropriately to complex arguments as functions      C   →   C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} \to \mathbb {C} }   , are holomorphic over the entire complex plane, making them entire  functions , while rational functions     p   /   q    {\displaystyle p/q}   , where p and q are polynomials, are holomorphic on domains that exclude points where q is zero.
Such functions that are holomorphic everywhere except a set of isolated points are known as meromorphic functions .
On the other hand, the functions     z  ↦  ℜ  (  z  )    {\displaystyle z\mapsto \Re (z)}   ,      z  ↦   |   z   |     {\displaystyle z\mapsto |z|}   , and     z  ↦     z  ¯       {\displaystyle z\mapsto {\bar {z}}}   are not holomorphic anywhere on the complex plane, as can be shown by their failure to satisfy the Cauchy–Riemann conditions (see below).
An important property of holomorphic functions is the relationship between the partial derivatives of their real and imaginary components, known as the Cauchy–Riemann conditions .
If     f  :   C   →   C     {\displaystyle f:\mathbb {C} \to \mathbb {C} }   , defined by     f  (  z  )  =  f  (  x  +  i  y  )  =  u  (  x  ,  y  )  +  i  v  (  x  ,  y  )    {\displaystyle f(z)=f(x+iy)=u(x,y)+iv(x,y)}   , where     x  ,  y  ,  u  (  x  ,  y  )  ,  v  (  x  ,  y  )  ∈   R     {\displaystyle x,y,u(x,y),v(x,y)\in \mathbb {R} }   , is holomorphic on a region      Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   , then for all      z   0    ∈  Ω    {\displaystyle z_{0}\in \Omega }   ,         ∂  f    ∂     z  ¯        (   z   0    )  =  0  ,     where     ∂   ∂     z  ¯         :=     1  2     (     ∂   ∂  x     +  i    ∂   ∂  y      )   .
{\displaystyle {\frac {\partial f}{\partial {\bar {z}}}}(z_{0})=0,\ {\text{where }}{\frac {\partial }{\partial {\bar {z}}}}\mathrel {:=} {\frac {1}{2}}\left({\frac {\partial }{\partial x}}+i{\frac {\partial }{\partial y}}\right).}
In terms of the real and imaginary parts of the function, u and v , this is equivalent to the pair of equations      u   x    =   v   y      {\displaystyle u_{x}=v_{y}}   and      u   y    =  −   v   x      {\displaystyle u_{y}=-v_{x}}   , where the subscripts indicate partial differentiation.
However, the Cauchy–Riemann conditions do not characterize holomorphic functions, without additional continuity conditions (see Looman–Menchoff theorem ).
Holomorphic functions exhibit some remarkable features.
For instance, Picard's theorem asserts that the range of an entire function can take only three possible forms:      C     {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} }   ,       C   ∖  {   z   0    }    {\displaystyle \mathbb {C} \setminus \{z_{0}\}}   , or     {   z   0    }    {\displaystyle \{z_{0}\}}   for some      z   0    ∈   C     {\displaystyle z_{0}\in \mathbb {C} }   .
In other words, if two distinct complex numbers     z    {\displaystyle z}   and     w    {\displaystyle w}   are not in the range of an entire function     f    {\displaystyle f}   , then     f    {\displaystyle f}   is a constant function.
Moreover, a holomorphic function on a connected open set is determined by its restriction to any nonempty open subset.
Conformal map   This section is an excerpt from Conformal map .
A rectangular grid (top) and its image under a conformal map     f    {\displaystyle f}   (bottom).
It is seen that     f    {\displaystyle f}   maps pairs of lines intersecting at 90° to pairs of curves still intersecting at 90°.
In mathematics , a conformal map is a function that locally preserves angles , but not necessarily lengths.
More formally, let     U    {\displaystyle U}   and     V    {\displaystyle V}   be open subsets of       R    n      {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{n}}   .
A function     f  :  U  →  V    {\displaystyle f:U\to V}   is called conformal (or angle-preserving) at a point      u   0    ∈  U    {\displaystyle u_{0}\in U}   if it preserves angles between directed curves through      u   0      {\displaystyle u_{0}}   , as well as preserving orientation.
Conformal maps preserve both angles and the shapes of infinitesimally small figures, but not necessarily their size or curvature .
The conformal property may be described in terms of the Jacobian derivative matrix of a coordinate transformation .
The transformation is conformal whenever the Jacobian at each point is a positive scalar times a rotation matrix ( orthogonal with determinant one).
Some authors define conformality to include orientation-reversing mappings  whose Jacobians can be written as any scalar times any orthogonal matrix.
For mappings in two dimensions, the (orientation-preserving) conformal mappings are precisely the locally invertible complex analytic functions.
In three and higher dimensions, Liouville's theorem sharply limits the conformal mappings to a few types.
The notion of conformality generalizes in a natural way to maps between Riemannian or semi-Riemannian manifolds .
Major results   Color wheel graph of the function f ( x ) = ( x 2 − 1)( x − 2 − i ) 2 / x 2 + 2 + 2 i .
Hue represents the argument , brightness the magnitude.
One of the central tools in complex analysis is the line integral .
The line integral around a closed path of a function that is holomorphic everywhere inside the area bounded by the closed path is always zero, as is stated by the Cauchy integral theorem .
The values of such a holomorphic function inside a disk can be computed by a path integral on the disk's boundary (as shown in Cauchy's integral formula ).
Path integrals in the complex plane are often used to determine complicated real integrals, and here the theory of residues among others is applicable (see methods of contour integration ).
A "pole" (or isolated singularity ) of a function is a point where the function's value becomes unbounded, or "blows up".
If a function has such a pole, then one can compute the function's residue there, which can be used to compute path integrals involving the function; this is the content of the powerful residue theorem .
The remarkable behavior of holomorphic functions near essential singularities is described by Picard's theorem .
Functions that have only poles but no essential singularities are called meromorphic .
Laurent series are the complex-valued equivalent to Taylor series , but can be used to study the behavior of functions near singularities through infinite sums of more well understood functions, such as polynomials.
A bounded function that is holomorphic in the entire complex plane must be constant; this is Liouville's theorem .
It can be used to provide a natural and short proof for the fundamental theorem of algebra which states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed .
If a function is holomorphic throughout a connected domain then its values are fully determined by its values on any smaller subdomain.
The function on the larger domain is said to be analytically continued from its values on the smaller domain.
This allows the extension of the definition of functions, such as the Riemann zeta function , which are initially defined in terms of infinite sums that converge only on limited domains to almost the entire complex plane.
Sometimes, as in the case of the natural logarithm , it is impossible to analytically continue a holomorphic function to a non-simply connected domain in the complex plane but it is possible to extend it to a holomorphic function on a closely related surface known as a Riemann surface .
All this refers to complex analysis in one variable.
There is also a very rich theory of complex analysis in more than one complex dimension in which the analytic properties such as power series expansion carry over whereas most of the geometric properties of holomorphic functions in one complex dimension (such as conformality ) do not carry over.
The Riemann mapping theorem about the conformal relationship of certain domains in the complex plane, which may be the most important result in the one-dimensional theory, fails dramatically in higher dimensions.
A major application of certain complex spaces is in quantum mechanics as wave functions .
Characterization of how many integers are prime    This article uses technical mathematical notation for logarithms.
All instances of log( x ) without a subscript base should be interpreted as a natural logarithm , commonly notated as ln( x ) or log e ( x ).
In mathematics , the prime number theorem ( PNT ) describes the asymptotic distribution of the prime numbers among the positive integers.
It formalizes the intuitive idea that primes become less common as they become larger by precisely quantifying the rate at which this occurs.
The theorem was proved independently by Jacques Hadamard  and Charles Jean de la Vallée Poussin  in 1896 using ideas introduced by Bernhard Riemann (in particular, the Riemann zeta function ).
The first such distribution found is π ( N ) ~ N / log( N ) , where π ( N ) is the prime-counting function (the number of primes less than or equal to N ) and log( N ) is the natural logarithm of N .
This means that for large enough N , the probability that a random integer not greater than N is prime is very close to 1 / log( N ) .
Consequently, a random integer with at most 2 n digits (for large enough n ) is about half as likely to be prime as a random integer with at most n digits.
For example, among the positive integers of at most 1000 digits, about one in 2300 is prime ( log(10 1000 ) ≈ 2302.6 ), whereas among positive integers of at most 2000 digits, about one in 4600 is prime ( log(10 2000 ) ≈ 4605.2 ).
In other words, the average gap between consecutive prime numbers among the first N integers is roughly log( N ) .
Statement   Graph showing ratio of the prime-counting function π ( x ) to two of its approximations, x / log x and Li( x ) .
As x increases (note x axis is logarithmic), both ratios tend towards 1.
The ratio for x / log x converges from above very slowly, while the ratio for Li( x ) converges more quickly from below.
Log-log plot showing absolute error of x / log x and Li( x ) , two approximations to the prime-counting function π ( x ) .
Unlike the ratio, the difference between π ( x ) and x / log x increases without bound as x increases.
On the other hand, Li( x ) − π ( x ) switches sign infinitely many times.
Let π ( x ) be the prime-counting function defined to be the number of primes less than or equal to x , for any real number x .
For example, π (10) = 4 because there are four prime numbers (2, 3, 5 and 7) less than or equal to 10.
The prime number theorem then states that x / log x is a good approximation to π ( x ) (where log here means the natural logarithm), in the sense that the limit of the quotient of the two functions π ( x ) and x / log x as x increases without bound is 1:       lim   x  →  ∞        π  (  x  )              =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\;\pi (x)\;}{\;\left\;}}=1,}    known as the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers .
Using asymptotic notation this result can be restated as      π  (  x  )  ∼    x   log  ⁡  x     .
{\displaystyle \pi (x)\sim {\frac {x}{\log x}}.}
This notation (and the theorem) does not say anything about the limit of the difference of the two functions as x increases without bound.
Instead, the theorem states that x / log x approximates π ( x ) in the sense that the relative error of this approximation approaches 0 as x increases without bound.
The prime number theorem is equivalent to the statement that the n th prime number p n satisfies       p   n    ∼  n  log  ⁡  (  n  )  ,    {\displaystyle p_{n}\sim n\log(n),}    the asymptotic notation meaning, again, that the relative error of this approximation approaches 0 as n increases without bound.
For example, the 2 × 10 17 th prime number is 8 512 677 386 048 191 063 ,  and ( 2 × 10 17 )log( 2 × 10 17 ) rounds to 7 967 418 752 291 744 388 , a relative error of about 6.4%.
On the other hand, the following asymptotic relations are logically equivalent:             lim   x  →  ∞       π  (  x  )  log  ⁡  x   x       =  1  ,       lim   x  →  ∞       π  (  x  )  log  ⁡  π  (  x  )   x       =  1.
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }{\frac {\pi (x)\log x}{x}}&=1,\\\lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }{\frac {\pi (x)\log \pi (x)}{x}}&=1.\end{aligned}}}    As outlined below , the prime number theorem is also equivalent to       lim   x  →  ∞       ϑ  (  x  )   x    =   lim   x  →  ∞       ψ  (  x  )   x    =  1  ,    {\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\vartheta (x)}{x}}=\lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\psi (x)}{x}}=1,}    where ϑ and ψ are the first and the second Chebyshev functions respectively, and to       lim   x  →  ∞       M  (  x  )   x    =  0  ,    {\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {M(x)}{x}}=0,}     where     M  (  x  )  =   ∑   n  ≤  x    μ  (  n  )    {\displaystyle M(x)=\sum _{n\leq x}\mu (n)}   is the Mertens function .
History of the proof of the asymptotic law of prime numbers   Based on the tables by Anton Felkel and Jurij Vega , Adrien-Marie Legendre conjectured in 1797 or 1798 that π ( a ) is approximated by the function a / ( A log a + B ) , where A and B are unspecified constants.
In the second edition of his book on number theory (1808) he then made a more precise conjecture , with A = 1 and B = −1.08366 .
Carl Friedrich Gauss considered the same question at age 15 or 16 "in the year 1792 or 1793", according to his own recollection in 1849.
In 1838 Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet came up with his own approximating function, the logarithmic integral  li( x ) (under the slightly different form of a series, which he communicated to Gauss).
Both Legendre's and Dirichlet's formulas imply the same conjectured asymptotic equivalence of π ( x ) and x / log( x ) stated above, although it turned out that Dirichlet's approximation is considerably better if one considers the differences instead of quotients.
In two papers from 1848 and 1850, the Russian mathematician Pafnuty Chebyshev attempted to prove the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers.
His work is notable for the use of the zeta function ζ ( s ) , for real values of the argument " s ", as in works of Leonhard Euler , as early as 1737.
Chebyshev's papers predated Riemann's celebrated memoir of 1859, and he succeeded in proving a slightly weaker form of the asymptotic law, namely, that if the limit as x goes to infinity of π ( x ) / ( x / log( x )) exists at all, then it is necessarily equal to one.
He was able to prove unconditionally that this ratio is bounded above and below by two explicitly given constants near 1, for all sufficiently large x .
Although Chebyshev's paper did not prove the Prime Number Theorem, his estimates for π ( x ) were strong enough for him to prove Bertrand's postulate that there exists a prime number between n and 2 n for any integer n ≥ 2 .
An important paper concerning the distribution of prime numbers was Riemann's 1859 memoir " On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude ", the only paper he ever wrote on the subject.
Riemann introduced new ideas into the subject, chiefly that the distribution of prime numbers is intimately connected with the zeros of the analytically extended Riemann zeta function of a complex variable.
In particular, it is in this paper that the idea to apply methods of complex analysis to the study of the real function π ( x ) originates.
Extending Riemann's ideas, two proofs of the asymptotic law of the distribution of prime numbers were found independently by Jacques Hadamard  and Charles Jean de la Vallée Poussin  and appeared in the same year (1896).
Both proofs used methods from complex analysis, establishing as a main step of the proof that the Riemann zeta function  ζ ( s ) is nonzero for all complex values of the variable s that have the form s = 1 + it with t > 0 .
During the 20th century, the theorem of Hadamard and de la Vallée Poussin also became known as the Prime Number Theorem.
Several different proofs of it were found, including the "elementary" proofs of Atle Selberg  and Paul Erdős  (1949).
Hadamard's and de la Vallée Poussin's original proofs are long and elaborate; later proofs introduced various simplifications through the use of Tauberian theorems but remained difficult to digest.
A short proof was discovered in 1980 by the American mathematician Donald J.
Newman .
Newman's proof is arguably the simplest known proof of the theorem, although it is non-elementary in the sense that it uses Cauchy's integral theorem from complex analysis.
Proof sketch   Here is a sketch of the proof referred to in one of Terence Tao 's lectures.
Like most proofs of the PNT, it starts out by reformulating the problem in terms of a less intuitive, but better-behaved, prime-counting function.
The idea is to count the primes (or a related set such as the set of prime powers) with weights to arrive at a function with smoother asymptotic behavior.
The most common such generalized counting function is the Chebyshev function  ψ ( x ) , defined by      ψ  (  x  )  =       ∑      p   is prime      p   k    ≤  x  ,           log  ⁡  p   .
{\displaystyle \psi (x)=\!\!\!\!\sum _{\stackrel {p^{k}\leq x,}{p{\text{ is prime}}}}\!\!\!\!\log p\;.}
This is sometimes written as      ψ  (  x  )  =   ∑   n  ≤  x    Λ  (  n  )   ,    {\displaystyle \psi (x)=\sum _{n\leq x}\Lambda (n)\;,}    where Λ ( n ) is the von Mangoldt function , namely      Λ  (  n  )  =    {     log  ⁡  p     if   n  =   p   k     for some prime   p   and integer   k  ≥  1  ,      0     otherwise.
{\displaystyle \Lambda (n)={\begin{cases}\log p&{\text{ if }}n=p^{k}{\text{ for some prime }}p{\text{ and integer }}k\geq 1,\\0&{\text{otherwise.
}}\end{cases}}}    It is now relatively easy to check that the PNT is equivalent to the claim that       lim   x  →  ∞       ψ  (  x  )   x    =  1   .
{\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }{\frac {\psi (x)}{x}}=1\;.}
Indeed, this follows from the easy estimates      ψ  (  x  )  =   ∑      p   is prime     p  ≤  x       log  ⁡  p   ⌊     log  ⁡  x    log  ⁡  p     ⌋   ≤   ∑      p   is prime     p  ≤  x       log  ⁡  x  =  π  (  x  )  log  ⁡  x    {\displaystyle \psi (x)=\sum _{\stackrel {p\leq x}{p{\text{ is prime}}}}\log p\left\lfloor {\frac {\log x}{\log p}}\right\rfloor \leq \sum _{\stackrel {p\leq x}{p{\text{ is prime}}}}\log x=\pi (x)\log x}    and (using big O notation ) for any ε > 0 ,      ψ  (  x  )  ≥       ∑      p   is prime      x   1  −  ε    ≤  p  ≤  x           log  ⁡  p  ≥       ∑      p   is prime      x   1  −  ε    ≤  p  ≤  x           (  1  −  ε  )  log  ⁡  x  =  (  1  −  ε  )   (   π  (  x  )  +  O   (   x   1  −  ε    )    )   log  ⁡  x   .
{\displaystyle \psi (x)\geq \!\!\!\!\sum _{\stackrel {x^{1-\varepsilon }\leq p\leq x}{p{\text{ is prime}}}}\!\!\!\!\log p\geq \!\!\!\!\sum _{\stackrel {x^{1-\varepsilon }\leq p\leq x}{p{\text{ is prime}}}}\!\!\!\!
(1-\varepsilon )\log x=(1-\varepsilon )\left(\pi (x)+O\left(x^{1-\varepsilon }\right)\right)\log x\;.}
The next step is to find a useful representation for ψ ( x ) .
Let ζ ( s ) be the Riemann zeta function.
It can be shown that ζ ( s ) is related to the von Mangoldt function  Λ ( n ) , and hence to ψ ( x ) , via the relation      −      ζ  ′   (  s  )    ζ  (  s  )     =   ∑   n  =  1    ∞    Λ  (  n  )    n   −  s     .
{\displaystyle -{\frac {\zeta '(s)}{\zeta (s)}}=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty }\Lambda (n)\,n^{-s}\;.}
A delicate analysis of this equation and related properties of the zeta function, using the Mellin transform and Perron's formula , shows that for non-integer x the equation      ψ  (  x  )  =  x   −   log  ⁡  (  2  π  )   −   ∑   ρ  :   ζ  (  ρ  )  =  0       x   ρ    ρ      {\displaystyle \psi (x)=x\;-\;\log(2\pi )\;-\sum \limits _{\rho :\,\zeta (\rho )=0}{\frac {x^{\rho }}{\rho }}}    holds, where the sum is over all zeros (trivial and nontrivial) of the zeta function.
This striking formula is one of the so-called explicit formulas of number theory , and is already suggestive of the result we wish to prove, since the term x (claimed to be the correct asymptotic order of ψ ( x ) ) appears on the right-hand side, followed by (presumably) lower-order asymptotic terms.
The next step in the proof involves a study of the zeros of the zeta function.
The trivial zeros −2, −4, −6, −8, ...
can be handled separately:       ∑   n  =  1    ∞      1   2  n    x   2  n       =  −    1  2    log  ⁡   (   1  −    1   x   2       )   ,    {\displaystyle \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {1}{2n\,x^{2n}}}=-{\frac {1}{2}}\log \left(1-{\frac {1}{x^{2}}}\right),}    which vanishes for large x .
The nontrivial zeros, namely those on the critical strip 0 ≤ Re( s ) ≤ 1 , can potentially be of an asymptotic order comparable to the main term x if Re( ρ ) = 1 , so we need to show that all zeros have real part strictly less than 1.
Non-vanishing on Re( s ) = 1   To do this, we take for granted that ζ ( s ) is meromorphic in the half-plane Re( s ) > 0 , and is analytic there except for a simple pole at s = 1 , and that there is a product formula      ζ  (  s  )  =   ∏   p      1   1  −   p   −  s         {\displaystyle \zeta (s)=\prod _{p}{\frac {1}{1-p^{-s}}}}    for Re( s ) > 1 .
This product formula follows from the existence of unique prime factorization of integers, and shows that ζ ( s ) is never zero in this region, so that its logarithm is defined there and      log  ⁡  ζ  (  s  )  =  −   ∑   p    log  ⁡   (   1  −   p   −  s     )   =   ∑   p  ,  n       p   −  n  s    n     .
{\displaystyle \log \zeta (s)=-\sum _{p}\log \left(1-p^{-s}\right)=\sum _{p,n}{\frac {p^{-ns}}{n}}\;.}
Write s = x + iy ; then        |    ζ  (  x  +  i  y  )    |    =  exp  ⁡   (    ∑   n  ,  p       cos  ⁡  n  y  log  ⁡  p    n   p   n  x        )    .
{\displaystyle {\big |}\zeta (x+iy){\big |}=\exp \left(\sum _{n,p}{\frac {\cos ny\log p}{np^{nx}}}\right)\;.}
Now observe the identity      3  +  4  cos  ⁡  ϕ  +  cos  ⁡  2  ϕ  =  2  (  1  +  cos  ⁡  ϕ   )   2    ≥  0   ,    {\displaystyle 3+4\cos \phi +\cos 2\phi =2(1+\cos \phi )^{2}\geq 0\;,}    so that       |   ζ  (  x   )   3    ζ  (  x  +  i  y   )   4    ζ  (  x  +  2  i  y  )   |   =  exp  ⁡   (    ∑   n  ,  p       3  +  4  cos  ⁡  (  n  y  log  ⁡  p  )  +  cos  ⁡  (  2  n  y  log  ⁡  p  )    n   p   n  x        )   ≥  1    {\displaystyle \left|\zeta (x)^{3}\zeta (x+iy)^{4}\zeta (x+2iy)\right|=\exp \left(\sum _{n,p}{\frac {3+4\cos(ny\log p)+\cos(2ny\log p)}{np^{nx}}}\right)\geq 1}    for all x > 1 .
Suppose now that ζ (1 + iy ) = 0 .
Certainly y is not zero, since ζ ( s ) has a simple pole at s = 1 .
Suppose that x > 1 and let x tend to 1 from above.
Since     ζ  (  s  )    {\displaystyle \zeta (s)}   has a simple pole at s = 1 and ζ ( x + 2 iy ) stays analytic, the left hand side in the previous inequality tends to 0, a contradiction.
Finally, we can conclude that the PNT is heuristically true.
To rigorously complete the proof there are still serious technicalities to overcome, due to the fact that the summation over zeta zeros in the explicit formula for ψ ( x ) does not converge absolutely but only conditionally and in a "principal value" sense.
There are several ways around this problem but many of them require rather delicate complex-analytic estimates.
Edwards's book  provides the details.
Another method is to use Ikehara's Tauberian theorem , though this theorem is itself quite hard to prove.
D.J.
Newman observed that the full strength of Ikehara's theorem is not needed for the prime number theorem, and one can get away with a special case that is much easier to prove.
Newman's proof of the prime number theorem   D.
J.
Newman gives a quick proof of the prime number theorem (PNT).
The proof is "non-elementary" by virtue of relying on complex analysis, but uses only elementary techniques from a first course in the subject: Cauchy's integral formula , Cauchy's integral theorem and estimates of complex integrals.
Here is a brief sketch of this proof.
See  for the complete details.
The proof uses the same preliminaries as in the previous section except instead of the function     ψ    {\textstyle \psi }   , the Chebyshev function      ϑ  (  x  )  =   ∑   p  ≤  x    log  ⁡  p    {\textstyle \quad \vartheta (x)=\sum _{p\leq x}\log p}   is used, which is obtained by dropping some of the terms from the series for     ψ    {\textstyle \psi }   .
It is easy to show that the PNT is equivalent to      lim   x  →  ∞    ϑ  (  x  )   /   x  =  1    {\displaystyle \lim _{x\to \infty }\vartheta (x)/x=1}   .
Likewise instead of     −      ζ  ′   (  s  )    ζ  (  s  )       {\displaystyle -{\frac {\zeta '(s)}{\zeta (s)}}}   the function     Φ  (  s  )  =   ∑   p  ≤  x    log  ⁡  p     p   −  s      {\displaystyle \Phi (s)=\sum _{p\leq x}\log p\,\,p^{-s}}   is used, which is obtained by dropping some terms in the series for     −      ζ  ′   (  s  )    ζ  (  s  )       {\displaystyle -{\frac {\zeta '(s)}{\zeta (s)}}}   .
The functions     Φ  (  s  )    {\displaystyle \Phi (s)}   and     −   ζ  ′   (  s  )   /   ζ  (  s  )    {\displaystyle -\zeta '(s)/\zeta (s)}   differ by a function holomorphic on     ℜ  s  =  1    {\displaystyle \Re s=1}   .
Since, as was shown in the previous section,     ζ  (  s  )    {\displaystyle \zeta (s)}   has no zeroes on the line     ℜ  s  =  1    {\displaystyle \Re s=1}   ,     Φ  (  s  )  −    1   s  −  1       {\displaystyle \Phi (s)-{\frac {1}{s-1}}}   has no singularities on     ℜ  s  =  1    {\displaystyle \Re s=1}   .
One further piece of information needed in Newman's proof, and which is the key to the estimates in his simple method, is that     ϑ  (  x  )   /   x    {\displaystyle \vartheta (x)/x}   is bounded.
This is proved using an ingenious and easy method due to Chebyshev.
Integration by parts  shows how     ϑ  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \vartheta (x)}   and     Φ  (  s  )    {\displaystyle \Phi (s)}   are related.
For     ℜ  s  >  1    {\displaystyle \Re s>1}   ,      Φ  (  s  )  =   ∫   1    ∞     x   −  s    d  ϑ  (  x  )  =  s   ∫   1    ∞    ϑ  (  x  )   x   −  s  −  1     d  x  =  s   ∫   0    ∞    ϑ  (   e   t    )   e   −  s  t     d  t  .
{\displaystyle \Phi (s)=\int _{1}^{\infty }x^{-s}d\vartheta (x)=s\int _{1}^{\infty }\vartheta (x)x^{-s-1}\,dx=s\int _{0}^{\infty }\vartheta (e^{t})e^{-st}\,dt.}
Newman's method proves the PNT by showing the integral      I  =   ∫   0    ∞     (      ϑ  (   e   t    )    e   t      −  1   )    d  t  .
{\displaystyle I=\int _{0}^{\infty }\left({\frac {\vartheta (e^{t})}{e^{t}}}-1\right)\,dt.}
converges, and therefore the integrand goes to zero as     t  →  ∞    {\displaystyle t\to \infty }   , which is  the PNT.
In general, the convergence of the improper integral does not imply that the integrand goes to zero at infinity, since it may oscillate, but since     ϑ    {\displaystyle \vartheta }   is increasing, it is easy to show in this case.
To show the convergence of     I    {\displaystyle I}   , for     ℜ  z  >  0    {\displaystyle \Re z>0}   let       g   T    (  z  )  =   ∫   0    T    f  (  t  )   e   −  z  t     d  t    {\displaystyle g_{T}(z)=\int _{0}^{T}f(t)e^{-zt}\,dt}   and     g  (  z  )  =   ∫   0    ∞    f  (  t  )   e   −  z  t     d  t    {\displaystyle g(z)=\int _{0}^{\infty }f(t)e^{-zt}\,dt}   where     f  (  t  )  =     ϑ  (   e   t    )    e   t      −  1    {\displaystyle f(t)={\frac {\vartheta (e^{t})}{e^{t}}}-1}    then       lim   T  →  ∞     g   T    (  z  )  =  g  (  z  )  =     Φ  (  s  )   s    −    1   s  −  1        where    z  =  s  −  1    {\displaystyle \lim _{T\to \infty }g_{T}(z)=g(z)={\frac {\Phi (s)}{s}}-{\frac {1}{s-1}}\quad \quad {\text{where}}\quad z=s-1}    which is equal to a function holomorphic on the line     ℜ  z  =  0    {\displaystyle \Re z=0}   .
The convergence of the integral     I    {\displaystyle I}   , and thus the PNT, is proved by showing that      lim   T  →  ∞     g   T    (  0  )  =  g  (  0  )    {\displaystyle \lim _{T\to \infty }g_{T}(0)=g(0)}   .
This involves change of order of limits since it can be written      lim   T  →  ∞     lim   z  →  0     g   T    (  z  )  =   lim   z  →  0     lim   T  →  ∞     g   T    (  z  )    {\textstyle \lim _{T\to \infty }\lim _{z\to 0}g_{T}(z)=\lim _{z\to 0}\lim _{T\to \infty }g_{T}(z)}   and therefore classified as a Tauberian theorem.
The difference     g  (  0  )  −   g   T    (  0  )    {\displaystyle g(0)-g_{T}(0)}   is expressed using Cauchy's integral formula and then shown to be small for     T    {\displaystyle T}   large by estimating the integrand.
Fix     R  >  0    {\displaystyle R>0}   and     δ  >  0    {\displaystyle \delta >0}   such that     g  (  z  )    {\displaystyle g(z)}   is holomorphic in the region  where      |   z   |   ≤  R   and   ℜ  z  ≥  −  δ    {\displaystyle |z|\leq R{\text{ and }}\Re z\geq -\delta }   ,  and let     C    {\displaystyle C}   be the boundary of this region.
Since 0 is in the interior of the region, Cauchy's integral formula gives      g  (  0  )  −   g   T    (  0  )  =    1   2  π  i      ∫   C     (   g  (  z  )  −   g   T    (  z  )   )      d  z   z    =    1   2  π  i      ∫   C     (   g  (  z  )  −   g   T    (  z  )   )   F  (  z  )     d  z   z      {\displaystyle g(0)-g_{T}(0)={\frac {1}{2\pi i}}\int _{C}\left(g(z)-g_{T}(z)\right){\frac {dz}{z}}={\frac {1}{2\pi i}}\int _{C}\left(g(z)-g_{T}(z)\right)F(z){\frac {dz}{z}}}    where     F  (  z  )  =   e   z  T     (   1  +     z   2     R   2       )     {\displaystyle F(z)=e^{zT}\left(1+{\frac {z^{2}}{R^{2}}}\right)}   is the factor introduced by Newman, which does not change the integral since     F    {\displaystyle F}   is entire and     F  (  0  )  =  1    {\displaystyle F(0)=1}   .
To estimate the integral, break the contour     C    {\displaystyle C}   into two parts,     C  =   C   +    +   C   −      {\displaystyle C=C_{+}+C_{-}}   where      C   +    =  C  ∩   {   z   |   ℜ  z  >  0   }     {\displaystyle C_{+}=C\cap \left\{z\,\vert \,\Re z>0\right\}}   and      C   −    ∩   {   ℜ  z  ≤  0   }     {\displaystyle C_{-}\cap \left\{\Re z\leq 0\right\}}   .
Then     g  (  0  )  −   g   T    (  0  )  =   ∫    C   +       ∫   T    ∞    H  (  t  ,  z  )  d  t  d  z  −   ∫    C   −       ∫   0    T    H  (  t  ,  z  )  d  t  d  z  +   ∫    C   −      g  (  z  )  F  (  z  )     d  z    2  π  i  z       {\displaystyle g(0)-g_{T}(0)=\int _{C_{+}}\int _{T}^{\infty }H(t,z)dtdz-\int _{C_{-}}\int _{0}^{T}H(t,z)dtdz+\int _{C_{-}}g(z)F(z){\frac {dz}{2\pi iz}}}   where     H  (  t  ,  z  )  =  f  (  t  )   e   −  t  z    F  (  z  )   /   2  π  i    {\displaystyle H(t,z)=f(t)e^{-tz}F(z)/2\pi i}   .
Since     ϑ  (  x  )   /   x    {\displaystyle \vartheta (x)/x}   , and hence     f  (  t  )    {\displaystyle f(t)}   , is bounded, let     B    {\displaystyle B}   be an upper bound for the absolute value of     f  (  t  )    {\displaystyle f(t)}   .
This bound together with the estimate      |   F   |   ≤  2  exp  ⁡  (  T  ℜ  z  )   |   ℜ  z   |    /   R    {\displaystyle |F|\leq 2\exp(T\Re z)|\Re z|/R}   for      |   z   |   =  R    {\displaystyle |z|=R}   gives that the first integral in absolute value is     ≤  B   /   R    {\displaystyle \leq B/R}   .
The integrand over      C   −      {\displaystyle C_{-}}   in the second integral is entire , so by Cauchy's integral theorem , the contour      C   −      {\displaystyle C_{-}}   can be modified to a semicircle of radius     R    {\displaystyle R}   in the left half-plane without changing the integral, and the same argument as for the first integral gives the absolute value of the second integral is     ≤  B   /   R    {\displaystyle \leq B/R}   .
Finally, letting     T  →  ∞    {\displaystyle T\to \infty }   , the third integral goes to zero since      e   z  T      {\displaystyle e^{zT}}   and hence     F    {\displaystyle F}   goes to zero on the contour.
Combining the two estimates and the limit get       lim sup   T  →  ∞     |   g  (  0  )  −   g   T    (  0  )   |   ≤     2  B   R    .
{\displaystyle \limsup _{T\to \infty }|g(0)-g_{T}(0)|\leq {\frac {2B}{R}}.}
This holds for any     R    {\displaystyle R}   so      lim   T  →  ∞     g   T    (  0  )  =  g  (  0  )    {\displaystyle \lim _{T\to \infty }g_{T}(0)=g(0)}   , and the PNT follows.
Prime-counting function in terms of the logarithmic integral   In a handwritten note on a reprint of his 1838 paper " Sur l'usage des séries infinies dans la théorie des nombres ", which he mailed to Gauss, Dirichlet conjectured (under a slightly different form appealing to a series rather than an integral) that an even better approximation to π ( x ) is given by the offset logarithmic integral function Li( x ) , defined by      Li  ⁡  (  x  )  =   ∫   2    x       d  t    log  ⁡  t     =  li  ⁡  (  x  )  −  li  ⁡  (  2  )  .
{\displaystyle \operatorname {Li} (x)=\int _{2}^{x}{\frac {dt}{\log t}}=\operatorname {li} (x)-\operatorname {li} (2).}
Indeed, this integral is strongly suggestive of the notion that the "density" of primes around t should be 1 / log t .
This function is related to the logarithm by the asymptotic expansion       Li  ⁡  (  x  )  ∼    x   log  ⁡  x      ∑   k  =  0    ∞       k  !
(  log  ⁡  x   )   k       =    x   log  ⁡  x     +    x   (  log  ⁡  x   )   2       +     2  x    (  log  ⁡  x   )   3       +  ⋯    {\displaystyle \operatorname {Li} (x)\sim {\frac {x}{\log x}}\sum _{k=0}^{\infty }{\frac {k!
}{(\log x)^{k}}}={\frac {x}{\log x}}+{\frac {x}{(\log x)^{2}}}+{\frac {2x}{(\log x)^{3}}}+\cdots }    So, the prime number theorem can also be written as π ( x ) ~ Li( x ) .
In fact, in another paper  in 1899 de la Vallée Poussin proved that      π  (  x  )  =  Li  ⁡  (  x  )  +  O   (   x   e   −  a    log  ⁡  x       )     as   x  →  ∞    {\displaystyle \pi (x)=\operatorname {Li} (x)+O\left(xe^{-a{\sqrt {\log x}}}\right)\quad {\text{as }}x\to \infty }    for some positive constant a , where O (...) is the big O notation .
This has been improved to      π  (  x  )  =  li  ⁡  (  x  )  +  O   (   x  exp  ⁡   (   −     A  (  log  ⁡  x   )    3  5       (  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  x   )    1  5         )    )     {\displaystyle \pi (x)=\operatorname {li} (x)+O\left(x\exp \left(-{\frac {A(\log x)^{\frac {3}{5}}}{(\log \log x)^{\frac {1}{5}}}}\right)\right)}   where     A  =  0.2098    {\displaystyle A=0.2098}   .
In 2016, Trudgian proved an explicit upper bound for the difference between     π  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \pi (x)}   and     li  ⁡  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \operatorname {li} (x)}   :        |    π  (  x  )  −  li  ⁡  (  x  )    |    ≤  0.2795    x   (  log  ⁡  x   )   3   /   4       exp  ⁡   (   −      log  ⁡  x   6.455      )     {\displaystyle {\big |}\pi (x)-\operatorname {li} (x){\big |}\leq 0.2795{\frac {x}{(\log x)^{3/4}}}\exp \left(-{\sqrt {\frac {\log x}{6.455}}}\right)}    for     x  ≥  229    {\displaystyle x\geq 229}   .
The connection between the Riemann zeta function and π ( x ) is one reason the Riemann hypothesis has considerable importance in number theory: if established, it would yield a far better estimate of the error involved in the prime number theorem than is available today.
More specifically, Helge von Koch showed in 1901  that if the Riemann hypothesis is true, the error term in the above relation can be improved to      π  (  x  )  =  Li  ⁡  (  x  )  +  O   (     x    log  ⁡  x   )     {\displaystyle \pi (x)=\operatorname {Li} (x)+O\left({\sqrt {x}}\log x\right)}    (this last estimate is in fact equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis).
The constant involved in the big O notation was estimated in 1976 by Lowell Schoenfeld :  assuming the Riemann hypothesis,        |    π  (  x  )  −  li  ⁡  (  x  )    |    <       x    log  ⁡  x    8  π       {\displaystyle {\big |}\pi (x)-\operatorname {li} (x){\big |}<{\frac {{\sqrt {x}}\log x}{8\pi }}}    for all x ≥ 2657 .
He also derived a similar bound for the Chebyshev prime-counting function  ψ :        |    ψ  (  x  )  −  x    |    <       x    (  log  ⁡  x   )   2      8  π       {\displaystyle {\big |}\psi (x)-x{\big |}<{\frac {{\sqrt {x}}(\log x)^{2}}{8\pi }}}    for all x ≥ 73.2 .
This latter bound has been shown to express a variance to mean power law (when regarded as a random function over the integers) and 1 /  f   noise and to also correspond to the Tweedie compound Poisson distribution .
(The Tweedie distributions represent a family of scale invariant distributions that serve as foci of convergence for a generalization of the central limit theorem .
 )
The logarithmic integral  li( x ) is larger than π ( x ) for "small" values of x .
This is because it is (in some sense) counting not primes, but prime powers, where a power p n of a prime p is counted as 1 /  n  of a prime.
This suggests that li( x ) should usually be larger than π ( x ) by roughly          1  2     li  ⁡  (    x    )    ,    {\displaystyle \ {\tfrac {1}{2}}\operatorname {li} ({\sqrt {x}})\ ,}   and in particular should always be larger than π ( x ) .
However, in 1914, J.
E.
Littlewood proved that       π  (  x  )  −  li  ⁡  (  x  )      {\displaystyle \ \pi (x)-\operatorname {li} (x)\ }   changes sign infinitely often.
The first value of x where π ( x ) exceeds li( x ) is probably around x ~ 10 316  ; see the article on Skewes' number for more details.
(On the other hand, the offset logarithmic integral  Li( x ) is smaller than π ( x ) already for x = 2 ; indeed, Li(2) = 0 , while π (2) = 1 .)
Elementary proofs   In the first half of the twentieth century, some mathematicians (notably G.
H.
Hardy ) believed that there exists a hierarchy of proof methods in mathematics depending on what sorts of numbers ( integers , reals , complex ) a proof requires, and that the prime number theorem (PNT) is a "deep" theorem by virtue of requiring complex analysis .
This belief was somewhat shaken by a proof of the PNT based on Wiener's tauberian theorem , though this could be set aside if Wiener's theorem were deemed to have a "depth" equivalent to that of complex variable methods.
In March 1948, Atle Selberg established, by "elementary" means, the asymptotic formula      ϑ  (  x  )  log  ⁡  (  x  )  +   ∑   p  ≤  x     log  ⁡  (  p  )     ϑ   (    x  p    )   =  2  x  log  ⁡  (  x  )  +  O  (  x  )    {\displaystyle \vartheta (x)\log(x)+\sum \limits _{p\leq x}{\log(p)}\ \vartheta \left({\frac {x}{p}}\right)=2x\log(x)+O(x)}    where      ϑ  (  x  )  =   ∑   p  ≤  x     log  ⁡  (  p  )     {\displaystyle \vartheta (x)=\sum \limits _{p\leq x}{\log(p)}}    for primes p .
By July of that year, Selberg and Paul Erdős  had each obtained elementary proofs of the PNT, both using Selberg's asymptotic formula as a starting point.
These proofs effectively laid to rest the notion that the PNT was "deep" in that sense, and showed that technically "elementary" methods were more powerful than had been believed to be the case.
On the history of the elementary proofs of the PNT, including the Erdős–Selberg priority dispute , see an article by Dorian Goldfeld .
There is some debate about the significance of Erdős and Selberg's result.
There is no rigorous and widely accepted definition of the notion of elementary proof in number theory, so it is not clear exactly in what sense their proof is "elementary".
Although it does not use complex analysis, it is in fact much more technical than the standard proof of PNT.
One possible definition of an "elementary" proof is "one that can be carried out in first-order Peano arithmetic ."
There are number-theoretic statements (for example, the Paris–Harrington theorem ) provable using second order but not first-order methods, but such theorems are rare to date.
Erdős and Selberg's proof can certainly be formalized in Peano arithmetic, and in 1994, Charalambos Cornaros and Costas Dimitracopoulos proved that their proof can be formalized in a very weak fragment of PA, namely I Δ 0 + exp .
However, this does not address the question of whether or not the standard proof of PNT can be formalized in PA.
 Computer verifications   In 2005, Avigad et al.
employed the Isabelle theorem prover to devise a computer-verified variant of the Erdős–Selberg proof of the PNT.
This was the first machine-verified proof of the PNT.
Avigad chose to formalize the Erdős–Selberg proof rather than an analytic one because while Isabelle's library at the time could implement the notions of limit, derivative, and transcendental function , it had almost no theory of integration to speak of.
: 19  In 2009, John Harrison employed HOL Light to formalize a proof employing complex analysis .
By developing the necessary analytic machinery, including the Cauchy integral formula , Harrison was able to formalize "a direct, modern and elegant proof instead of the more involved 'elementary' Erdős–Selberg argument".
Prime number theorem for arithmetic progressions   Let π d , a ( x ) denote the number of primes in the arithmetic progression  a , a + d , a + 2 d , a + 3 d , ...
that are less than x .
Dirichlet and Legendre conjectured, and de la Vallée Poussin proved, that if a and d are coprime , then       π   d  ,  a    (  x  )  ∼     Li  ⁡  (  x  )    φ  (  d  )       ,    {\displaystyle \pi _{d,a}(x)\sim {\frac {\operatorname {Li} (x)}{\varphi (d)}}\ ,}    where φ is Euler's totient function .
In other words, the primes are distributed evenly among the residue classes   modulo  d with gcd( a , d ) = 1 .
This is stronger than Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions (which only states that there is an infinity of primes in each class) and can be proved using similar methods used by Newman for his proof of the prime number theorem.
The Siegel–Walfisz theorem gives a good estimate for the distribution of primes in residue classes.
Bennett et al.
proved the following estimate that has explicit constants A and B (Theorem 1.3):
Let d      ≥  3    {\displaystyle \geq 3}   be an integer and let a be an integer that is coprime to d .
Then there are positive constants A and B such that       |    π   d  ,  a    (  x  )  −       Li  ⁡  (  x  )        φ  (  d  )        |   <     A    x      (  log  ⁡  x   )   2           for all    x  ≥  B    ,    {\displaystyle \left|\pi _{d,a}(x)-{\frac {\ \operatorname {Li} (x)\ }{\ \varphi (d)\ }}\right|<{\frac {A\ x}{\ (\log x)^{2}\ }}\quad {\text{ for all }}\quad x\geq B\ ,}    where      A  =    1     840         if    3  ≤  d  ≤   10   4      and    A  =    1     160         if    d  >   10   4      ,    {\displaystyle A={\frac {1}{\ 840\ }}\quad {\text{ if }}\quad 3\leq d\leq 10^{4}\quad {\text{ and }}\quad A={\frac {1}{\ 160\ }}\quad {\text{ if }}\quad d>10^{4}~,}    and      B  =  8  ⋅   10   9      if    3  ≤  d  ≤   10   5      and    B  =  exp  ⁡  (    0.03      d        (  log  ⁡   d    )   3      )    if    d  >   10   5      .
{\displaystyle B=8\cdot 10^{9}\quad {\text{ if }}\quad 3\leq d\leq 10^{5}\quad {\text{ and }}\quad B=\exp(\ 0.03\ {\sqrt {d\ }}\ (\log {d})^{3}\ )\quad {\text{ if }}\quad d>10^{5}\ .}
Prime number race   Plot of the function       π  (  x  ;  4  ,  3  )  −  π  (  x  ;  4  ,  1  )      {\displaystyle \ \pi (x;4,3)-\pi (x;4,1)\ }   for n ≤ 30000  Although we have in particular       π   4  ,  1    (  x  )  ∼   π   4  ,  3    (  x  )    ,    {\displaystyle \pi _{4,1}(x)\sim \pi _{4,3}(x)\ ,}    empirically the primes congruent to 3 are more numerous and are nearly always ahead in this "prime number race"; the first reversal occurs at x = 26861 .
: 1–2 However Littlewood showed in 1914  : 2 that there are infinitely many sign changes for the function       π   4  ,  1    (  x  )  −   π   4  ,  3    (  x  )    ,    {\displaystyle \pi _{4,1}(x)-\pi _{4,3}(x)~,}    so the lead in the race switches back and forth infinitely many times.
The phenomenon that π 4,3 ( x ) is ahead most of the time is called Chebyshev's bias .
The prime number race generalizes to other moduli and is the subject of much research; Pál Turán asked whether it is always the case that π ( x ; a , c ) and π ( x ; b , c ) change places when a and b are coprime to c .
Granville and Martin give a thorough exposition and survey.
Graph of the number of primes ending in 1, 3, 7, and 9 up to n for n < 10,000  Another example is the distribution of the last digit of prime numbers.
Except for 2 and 5, all prime numbers end in 1, 3, 7, or 9.
Dirichlet's theorem states that asymptotically, 25% of all primes end in each of these four digits.
However, empirical evidence shows that the number of primes that end in 3 or 7 less than n tends to be slightly bigger than the number of primes that end in 1 or 9 less than n (a generation of the Chebyshev's bias).
This follows that 1 and 9 are quadratic residues modulo 10, and 3 and 7 are quadratic nonresidues modulo 10.
Non-asymptotic bounds on the prime-counting function   The prime number theorem is an asymptotic result.
It gives an ineffective bound on π ( x ) as a direct consequence of the definition of the limit: for all ε > 0 , there is an S such that for all x > S ,      (  1  −  ε  )    x   log  ⁡  x      <   π  (  x  )   <   (  1  +  ε  )    x   log  ⁡  x      .
{\displaystyle (1-\varepsilon ){\frac {x}{\log x}}\;<\;\pi (x)\;<\;(1+\varepsilon ){\frac {x}{\log x}}\;.}
However, better bounds on π ( x ) are known, for instance Pierre Dusart 's        x   log  ⁡  x      (   1  +    1   log  ⁡  x      )    <   π  (  x  )   <     x   log  ⁡  x      (   1  +    1   log  ⁡  x     +    2.51   (  log  ⁡  x   )   2        )    .
{\displaystyle {\frac {x}{\log x}}\left(1+{\frac {1}{\log x}}\right)\;<\;\pi (x)\;<\;{\frac {x}{\log x}}\left(1+{\frac {1}{\log x}}+{\frac {2.51}{(\log x)^{2}}}\right)\;.}
The first inequality holds for all x ≥ 599 and the second one for x ≥ 355991 .
A weaker but sometimes useful bound for x ≥ 55 is          x   log  ⁡  x  +  2      <   π  (  x  )   <     x   log  ⁡  x  −  4      .
{\displaystyle {\frac {x}{\log x+2}}\;<\;\pi (x)\;<\;{\frac {x}{\log x-4}}\;.}
In Pierre Dusart's thesis there are stronger versions of this type of inequality that are valid for larger x .
Later in 2010, Dusart proved:              x   log  ⁡  x  −  1         <   π  (  x  )      for   x  ≥  5393   ,   and       π  (  x  )      <     x   log  ⁡  x  −  1.1         for   x  ≥  60184   .
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\frac {x}{\log x-1}}\;&<\;\pi (x)&&{\text{  for }}x\geq 5393\;,{\text{   and }}\\\pi (x)\;&<\;{\frac {x}{\log x-1.1}}&&{\text{  for }}x\geq 60184\;.\end{aligned}}}    The proof by de la Vallée Poussin implies the following: For every ε > 0 , there is an S such that for all x > S ,        x   log  ⁡  x  −  (  1  −  ε  )      <   π  (  x  )   <     x   log  ⁡  x  −  (  1  +  ε  )      .
{\displaystyle {\frac {x}{\log x-(1-\varepsilon )}}\;<\;\pi (x)\;<\;{\frac {x}{\log x-(1+\varepsilon )}}\;.}
Approximations for the n th prime number   As a consequence of the prime number theorem, one gets an asymptotic expression for the n th prime number, denoted by p n :       p   n    ∼  n  log  ⁡  n  .
{\displaystyle p_{n}\sim n\log n.}    A better approximation is           p   n    n    =  log  ⁡  n  +  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n  −  1  +     log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n  −  2    log  ⁡  n     −     (  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n   )   2    −  6  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n  +  11    2  (  log  ⁡  n   )   2       +  o   (    1   (  log  ⁡  n   )   2       )   .
{\displaystyle {\frac {p_{n}}{n}}=\log n+\log \log n-1+{\frac {\log \log n-2}{\log n}}-{\frac {(\log \log n)^{2}-6\log \log n+11}{2(\log n)^{2}}}+o\left({\frac {1}{(\log n)^{2}}}\right).}
Again considering the 2 × 10 17 th prime number 8 512 677 386 048 191 063 , this gives an estimate of 8 512 681 315 554 715 386 ; the first 5 digits match and relative error is about 0.00005%.
Rosser's theorem states that       p   n    >  n  log  ⁡  n  .
{\displaystyle p_{n}>n\log n.}    This can be improved by the following pair of bounds:          log  ⁡  n  +  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n  −  1  <     p   n    n    <  log  ⁡  n  +  log  ⁡  log  ⁡  n    for   n  ≥  6.
{\displaystyle \log n+\log \log n-1<{\frac {p_{n}}{n}}<\log n+\log \log n\quad {\text{for }}n\geq 6.}
Table of π ( x ) , x / log x , and li( x )   The table compares exact values of π ( x ) to the two approximations x / log x and li( x ) .
The last column, x / π ( x ) , is the average prime gap below x .
x   π ( x )   π ( x ) − x / log x   π ( x ) / x / log x   li( x ) − π ( x )   x / π ( x )    10  4  −0.3  0.921  2.2  2.5 00    10 2   25  3.3  1.151  5.1  4 .000    10 3   168  23 .0   1.161  10 .0   5.952   10 4   1 229   143 .0   1.132  17 .0   8.137   10 5   9 592   906 .0   1.104  38 .0   10.425   10 6   78 498   6 116 .0   1.084  130 .0   12.740   10 7   664 579   44 158 .0   1.071  339 .0   15.047   10 8   5 761 455   332 774 .0   1.061  754 .0   17.357   10 9   50 847 534   2 592 592 .0   1.054  1 701 .0   19.667   10 10   455 052 511   20 758 029 .0   1.048  3 104 .0   21.975   10 11   4 118 054 813   169 923 159 .0   1.043  11 588 .0   24.283   10 12   37 607 912 018   1 416 705 193 .0   1.039  38 263 .0   26.590   10 13   346 065 536 839   11 992 858 452 .0   1.034  108 971 .0   28.896   10 14   3 204 941 750 802   102 838 308 636 .0   1.033  314 890 .0   31.202   10 15   29 844 570 422 669   891 604 962 452 .0   1.031  1 052 619 .0   33.507   10 16   279 238 341 033 925   7 804 289 844 393 .0   1.029  3 214 632 .0   35.812   10 17   2 623 557 157 654 233   68 883 734 693 281 .0   1.027  7 956 589 .0   38.116   10 18   24 739 954 287 740 860   612 483 070 893 536 .0   1.025  21 949 555 .0   40.420   10 19   234 057 667 276 344 607   5 481 624 169 369 960 .0   1.024  99 877 775 .0   42.725   10 20   2 220 819 602 560 918 840   49 347 193 044 659 701 .0   1.023  222 744 644 .0   45.028   10 21   21 127 269 486 018 731 928   446 579 871 578 168 707 .0   1.022  597 394 254 .0   47.332   10 22   201 467 286 689 315 906 290   4 060 704 006 019 620 994 .0   1.021  1 932 355 208 .0   49.636   10 23   1 925 320 391 606 803 968 923   37 083 513 766 578 631 309 .0   1.020  7 250 186 216 .0   51.939   10 24   18 435 599 767 349 200 867 866   339 996 354 713 708 049 069 .0   1.019  17 146 907 278 .0   54.243   10 25   176 846 309 399 143 769 411 680   3 128 516 637 843 038 351 228 .0   1.018  55 160 980 939 .0   56.546   OEIS   A006880   A057835     A057752     The value for π (10 24 ) was originally computed assuming the Riemann hypothesis ;  it has since been verified unconditionally.
Analogue for irreducible polynomials over a finite field   There is an analogue of the prime number theorem that describes the "distribution" of irreducible polynomials over a finite field ; the form it takes is strikingly similar to the case of the classical prime number theorem.
To state it precisely, let F = GF( q ) be the finite field with q elements, for some fixed q , and let N n be the number of monic  irreducible polynomials over F whose degree is equal to n .
That is, we are looking at polynomials with coefficients chosen from F , which cannot be written as products of polynomials of smaller degree.
In this setting, these polynomials play the role of the prime numbers, since all other monic polynomials are built up of products of them.
One can then prove that       N   n    ∼     q   n    n    .
{\displaystyle N_{n}\sim {\frac {q^{n}}{n}}.}
If we make the substitution x = q n , then the right hand side is just        x    log   q    ⁡  x     ,    {\displaystyle {\frac {x}{\log _{q}x}},}    which makes the analogy clearer.
Since there are precisely q n monic polynomials of degree n (including the reducible ones), this can be rephrased as follows: if a monic polynomial of degree n is selected randomly, then the probability of it being irreducible is about 1 / n .
One can even prove an analogue of the Riemann hypothesis, namely that       N   n    =     q   n    n    +  O   (     q    n  2     n    )   .
{\displaystyle N_{n}={\frac {q^{n}}{n}}+O\left({\frac {q^{\frac {n}{2}}}{n}}\right).}
The proofs of these statements are far simpler than in the classical case.
It involves a short, combinatorial argument,  summarised as follows: every element of the degree n extension of F is a root of some irreducible polynomial whose degree d divides n ; by counting these roots in two different ways one establishes that       q   n    =   ∑   d  ∣  n    d   N   d    ,    {\displaystyle q^{n}=\sum _{d\mid n}dN_{d},}    where the sum is over all divisors  d of n .
Möbius inversion then yields       N   n    =    1  n     ∑   d  ∣  n    μ   (    n  d    )    q   d    ,    {\displaystyle N_{n}={\frac {1}{n}}\sum _{d\mid n}\mu \left({\frac {n}{d}}\right)q^{d},}    where μ ( k ) is the Möbius function .
(This formula was known to Gauss.)
The main term occurs for d = n , and it is not difficult to bound the remaining terms.
The "Riemann hypothesis" statement depends on the fact that the largest proper divisor of n can be no larger than n / 2 .
Fisher Burns |website=onemathematicalcat.org |access-date=October 15, 2009}}</ref>  Edit summary  (Briefly describe your changes)  By publishing changes, you agree to the Terms of Use , and you irrevocably agree to release your contribution under the CC BY-SA 4.0 License and the GFDL .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Educational puzzle to be solved by symbol manipulation  A mathematical exercise is a routine application of algebra or other mathematics to a stated challenge.
Mathematics teachers assign mathematical exercises to develop the skills of their students.
Early exercises deal with addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division of integers .
Extensive courses of exercises in school extend such arithmetic to rational numbers .
Various approaches to geometry have based exercises on relations of angles , segments , and triangles .
The topic of trigonometry gains many of its exercises from the trigonometric identities .
In college mathematics exercises often depend on functions of a real variable or application of theorems .
The standard exercises of calculus involve finding derivatives and integrals of specified functions.
Usually instructors prepare students with worked examples : the exercise is stated, then a model answer is provided.
Often several worked examples are demonstrated before students are prepared to attempt exercises on their own.
Some texts, such as those in Schaum's Outlines , focus on worked examples rather than theoretical treatment of a mathematical topic.
Overview   According to Lev Vygotsky , appropriate exercises lie in a zone where students can complete the task with guidance  In primary school students start with single digit arithmetic exercises.
Later most exercises involve at least two digits.
A common exercise in elementary algebra calls for factorization of polynomials .
Another exercise is completing the square in a quadratic polynomial .
An artificially produced word problem is a genre of exercise intended to keep mathematics relevant.
Stephen Leacock described this type:    The student of arithmetic who has mastered the first four rules of his art and successfully striven with sums and fractions finds himself confronted by an unbroken expanse of questions known as problems.
These are short stories of adventure and industry with the end omitted and, though betraying a strong family resemblance, are not without a certain element of romance.
A distinction between an exercise and a mathematical problem was made by Alan H.
Schoenfeld :    Students must master the relevant subject matter, and exercises are appropriate for that.
But if rote exercises are the only kinds of problems that students see in their classes, we are doing the students a grave disservice.
He advocated setting challenges:  By "real problems" ...
I mean mathematical tasks that pose an honest challenge to the student and that the student needs to work at in order to obtain a solution.
A similar sentiment was expressed by Marvin Bittinger when he prepared the second edition  of his textbook:  In response to comments from users, the authors have added exercises that require something of the student other than an understanding of the immediate objectives of the lesson at hand, yet are not necessarily highly challenging.
The zone of proximal development for each student, or cohort of students, sets exercises at a level of difficulty that challenges but does not frustrate them.
Some comments in the preface of a calculus textbook  show the central place of exercises in the book:  The exercises comprise about one-quarter of the text – the most important part of the text in our opinion.
Supplementary exercises at the end of each chapter expand the other exercise sets and provide cumulative exercises that require skills from earlier chapters.
This text includes "Functions and Graphs in Applications" (Ch 0.6) which is fourteen pages of preparation for word problems.
Authors of a book on finite fields chose their exercises freely:    In order to enhance the attractiveness of this book as a textbook , we have included worked-out examples at appropriate points in the text and have included lists of exercises for Chapters 1 — 9.
These exercises range from routine problems to alternative proofs of key theorems, but containing also material going beyond what is covered in the text.
J.
C.
Maxwell explained how exercise facilitates access to the language of mathematics :    As mathematicians we perform certain mental operations on the symbols of number or quantity, and, proceeding step by step from more simple to more complex operations, we are enabled to express the same thing in many different forms.
The equivalence of these different forms, though a necessary consequence of self-evident axioms, is not always, to our minds, self-evident; but the mathematician, who by long practice has acquired a familiarity with many of these forms, and has become expert in the processes which lead from one to another, can often transform a perplexing expression into another which explains its meaning in more intelligible language.
The individual instructors at various colleges use exercises as part of their mathematics courses.
Investigating problem solving in universities, Schoenfeld noted:    Upper division offerings for mathematics majors, where for the most part students worked on collections of problems that had been compiled by their individual instructors.
In such courses emphasis was on learning by doing, without an attempt to teach specific heuristics: the students worked lots of problems because (according to the implicit instructional model behind such courses) that’s how one gets good at mathematics.
Such exercise collections may be proprietary to the instructor and his institution.
As an example of the value of exercise sets, consider the accomplishment of Toru Kumon and his Kumon method .
In his program, a student does not proceed before mastery of each level of exercise.
At the Russian School of Mathematics , students begin multi-step problems as early as the first grade, learning to build on previous results to progress towards the solution.
In the 1960s, collections of mathematical exercises were translated from Russian and published by W.
H.
Freeman and Company : The USSR Olympiad Problem Book (1962),   Problems in Higher Algebra (1965),  and Problems in Differential Equations (1963).
History   In China, from ancient times counting rods were used to represent numbers, and arithmetic was accomplished with rod calculus and later the suanpan .
The Book on Numbers and Computation and the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art include exercises that are exemplars of linear algebra .
In about 980 Al-Sijzi wrote his Ways of Making Easy the Derivation of Geometrical Figures , which was translated and published by Jan Hogendijk in 1996.
An Arabic language collection of exercises was given a Spanish translation as Compendio de Algebra de Abenbéder and reviewed in Nature .
Robert Recorde first published The Ground of Arts in 1543.
Firstly, it was almost all exposition with very few exercises — The later came into prominence in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
As a comparison we might look at another best seller, namely Walkingame’s Tutor's Assistant , first published in 1751, 70 per cent of which was devoted to exercises as opposed to about 1 per cent by Recorde.
The inclusion of exercises was one of the most significant subsequent developments in arithmetical textbooks, and paralleled the development of education as teachers began to make use of textbooks as sources of exercises.
Recorde was writing mainly for those who were teaching themselves, scholars who would have no one to check their answers to the exercises.
In Europe before 1900, the science of graphical perspective framed geometrical exercises.
For example, in 1719 Brook Taylor wrote in New Principles of Linear Perspective    will find much more pleasure in observing how extensive these Principles are, by applying them to particular Cases which he himself shall devise, while he exercises himself in this Art,...
  Taylor continued  ...for the true and best way of learning any Art, is not to see a great many Examples done by another Person; but to possess ones self first of the Principles of it, and then to make them familiar, by exercising ones self in the Practice.
The use of writing slates in schools provided an early format for exercises.
Growth of exercise programs followed introduction of written examinations and study based on pen and paper.
Felix Klein described preparation for the entrance examination of École Polytechnique as    ...a course of "mathematiques especiales".
This is an extraordinarily strong concentration of mathematical education – up to 16 hours a week – in which elementary analytic geometry and mechanics, and recently infinitesimal calculus also, are thoroughly studied and are made into a securely mastered tool by means of many exercises.
Sylvestre Lacroix was a gifted teacher and expositor.
His book on descriptive geometry uses sections labelled "Probleme" to exercise the reader’s understanding.
In 1816 he wrote Essays on Teaching in General, and on Mathematics Teaching in Particular which emphasized the need to exercise and test:  The examiner, obliged, in the short-term, to multiply his questions enough to cover the subjects that he asks, to the greater part of the material taught, cannot be less thorough, since if, to abbreviate, he puts applications aside, he will not gain anything for the pupils’ faculties this way.
Andrew Warwick has drawn attention to the historical question of exercises:  The inclusion of illustrative exercises and problems at the end of chapters in textbooks of mathematical physics is now so commonplace as to seem unexceptional, but it is important to appreciate that this pedagogical device is of relatively recent origin and was introduced in a specific historical context.
: 168  In reporting Mathematical tripos examinations instituted at Cambridge University , he notes  Such cumulative, competitive learning was also accomplished more effectively by private tutors using individual tuition, specially prepared manuscripts, and graded examples and problems, than it was by college lecturers teaching large classes at the pace of the mediocre.
: 79  Explaining the relationship of examination and exercise, he writes  ...by the 1830s it was the problems on examination papers, rather than exercises in textbooks, that defined the standard to which ambitious students aspired...
not only expected to find their way through the merest sketch of an example, but were taught to regard such exercises as useful preparation for tackling difficult problems in examinations.
: 152  Explaining how the reform took root, Warwick wrote:  It was widely believed in Cambridge that the best way of teaching mathematics, including the new analytical methods, was through practical examples and problems, and, by the mid-1830s, some of the first generation of young college fellows to have been taught higher analysis this way were beginning both to undertake their own research and to be appointed Tripos examiners.
: 155  Warwick reports that in Germany, Franz Ernst Neumann about the same time "developed a common system of graded exercises that introduced student to a hierarchy of essential mathematical skills and techniques, and ...began to construct his own problem sets through which his students could learn their craft."
: 174 In Russia, Stephen Timoshenko reformed instruction around exercises.
In 1913 he was teaching strength of materials at the Petersburg State University of Means of Communication .
As he wrote in 1968,   exercises were not given at the Institute, and on examinations the students were asked only theoretical questions from the adopted textbook.
I had to put an end to this kind of teaching as soon as possible.
The students clearly understood the situation, realized the need for better assimilation of the subject, and did not object to the heavy increase in their work load.
The main difficulty was with the teachers – or more precisely, with the examiners, who were accustomed to basing their exams on the book.
Putting practical problems on the exams complicated their job.
They were persons along in years...the only hope was to bring younger people into teaching.
===Colloquial use of "mathematical proof"===
The expression "mathematical proof" is used by lay people to refer to using mathematical methods or arguing with ]s, such as numbers, to demonstrate something about everyday life, or when data used in an argument is numerical.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "The process of analyzing data to discover useful information and support decision-making  Part of a series on Statistics Data and information visualization Major dimensions  Exploratory data analysis  Information design  Interactive data visualization  Descriptive statistics  Inferential statistics  Statistical graphics  Plot  Data analysis  Infographic  Data science  Important figures  Tamara Munzner  Ben Shneiderman  John Tukey  Edward Tufte  Simon Wardley  Hans Rosling  David McCandless  Kim Albrecht  Alexander Osterwalder  Ed Hawkins  Hadley Wickham  Leland Wilkinson  Mike Bostock  Jeffrey Heer  Ihab Ilyas  Information graphic types  Line chart  Bar chart  Histogram  Scatter plot  Box plot  Pareto chart  Pie chart  Area chart  Tree map  Bubble chart  Stripe graphic  Control chart  Run chart  Stem-and-leaf display  Cartogram  Small multiple  Sparkline  Table  Marimekko chart  Related topics  Data  Information  Big data  Database  Chartjunk  Visual perception  Regression analysis  Statistical model  Misleading graph  v t e  Computational physics  Mechanics  Electromagnetics  Multiphysics  Particle physics  Thermodynamics  Simulation   Potentials  Morse/Long-range potential  Lennard-Jones potential  Yukawa potential  Morse potential   Fluid dynamics  Finite difference  Finite volume  Finite element  Boundary element  Lattice Boltzmann  Riemann solver  Dissipative particle dynamics  Smoothed particle hydrodynamics  Turbulence models   Monte Carlo methods  Integration  Gibbs sampling  Metropolis algorithm   Particle  N-body  Particle-in-cell  Molecular dynamics   Scientists  Godunov  Ulam  von Neumann  Galerkin  Lorenz  Wilson  Alder  Richtmyer  v t e  Data analysis is the process of inspecting, cleansing , transforming , and modeling  data with the goal of discovering useful information, informing conclusions, and supporting decision-making.
Data analysis has multiple facets and approaches, encompassing diverse techniques under a variety of names, and is used in different business, science, and social science domains.
In today's business world, data analysis plays a role in making decisions more scientific and helping businesses operate more effectively.
Data mining is a particular data analysis technique that focuses on statistical modeling and knowledge discovery for predictive rather than purely descriptive purposes, while business intelligence covers data analysis that relies heavily on aggregation, focusing mainly on business information.
In statistical applications, data analysis can be divided into descriptive statistics , exploratory data analysis (EDA), and confirmatory data analysis (CDA).
EDA focuses on discovering new features in the data while CDA focuses on confirming or falsifying existing hypotheses .
Predictive analytics focuses on the application of statistical models for predictive forecasting or classification, while text analytics applies statistical, linguistic, and structural techniques to extract and classify information from textual sources, a species of unstructured data .
All of the above are varieties of data analysis.
Data integration is a precursor to data analysis, and data analysis is closely linked to data visualization and data dissemination.
The process of data analysis   Data science process flowchart from Doing Data Science , by Schutt & O'Neil (2013)  Analysis refers to dividing a whole into its separate components for individual examination.
Data analysis is a process for obtaining raw data , and subsequently converting it into information useful for decision-making by users.
Data is collected and analyzed to answer questions, test hypotheses, or disprove theories.
Statistician John Tukey , defined data analysis in 1961, as: "Procedures for analyzing data, techniques for interpreting the results of such procedures, ways of planning the gathering of data to make its analysis easier, more precise or more accurate, and all the machinery and results of (mathematical) statistics which apply to analyzing data."
There are several phases that can be distinguished, described below.
The phases are iterative , in that feedback from later phases may result in additional work in earlier phases.
The CRISP framework , used in data mining , has similar steps.
Data requirements   The data is necessary as inputs to the analysis, which is specified based upon the requirements of those directing the analytics (or customers, who will use the finished product of the analysis).
The general type of entity upon which the data will be collected is referred to as an experimental unit (e.g., a person or population of people).
Specific variables regarding a population (e.g., age and income) may be specified and obtained.
Data may be numerical or categorical (i.e., a text label for numbers).
Data collection   Data is collected from a variety of sources.
A list of data sources are available for study & research.
The requirements may be communicated by analysts to custodians of the data; such as, Information Technology personnel within an organization.
Data collection or data gathering is the process of gathering and measuring  information on targeted variables in an established system, which then enables one to answer relevant questions and evaluate outcomes.
The data may also be collected from sensors in the environment, including traffic cameras, satellites, recording devices, etc.
It may also be obtained through interviews, downloads from online sources, or reading documentation.
Data processing   The phases of the intelligence cycle used to convert raw information into actionable intelligence or knowledge are conceptually similar to the phases in data analysis.
Data, when initially obtained, must be processed or organized for analysis.
For instance, these may involve placing data into rows and columns in a table format ( known as  structured data ) for further analysis, often through the use of spreadsheet or statistical software.
Data cleaning   Main article: Data cleansing  Once processed and organized, the data may be incomplete, contain duplicates, or contain errors.
The need for data cleaning will arise from problems in the way that the datum are entered and stored.
Data cleaning is the process of preventing and correcting these errors.
Common tasks include record matching, identifying inaccuracy of data, overall quality of existing data, deduplication, and column segmentation.
Such data problems can also be identified through a variety of analytical techniques.
For example; with financial information, the totals for particular variables may be compared against separately published numbers that are believed to be reliable.
Unusual amounts, above or below predetermined thresholds, may also be reviewed.
There are several types of data cleaning, that are dependent upon the type of data in the set; this could be phone numbers, email addresses, employers, or other values.
Quantitative data methods for outlier detection, can be used to get rid of data that appears to have a higher likelihood of being input incorrectly.
Textual data spell checkers can be used to lessen the amount of mistyped words.
However, it is harder to tell if the words themselves are correct.
Exploratory data analysis   Once the datasets are cleaned, they can then be analyzed.
Analysts may apply a variety of techniques, referred to as exploratory data analysis , to begin understanding the messages contained within the obtained data.
The process of data exploration may result in additional data cleaning or additional requests for data; thus, the initialization of the iterative phases mentioned in the lead paragraph of this section.
Descriptive statistics , such as, the average or median, can be generated to aid in understanding the data.
Data visualization is also a technique used, in which the analyst is able to examine the data in a graphical format in order to obtain additional insights, regarding the messages within the data.
Modeling and algorithms   Mathematical formulas or models (also known as algorithms ), may be applied to the data in order to identify relationships among the variables; for example, using correlation or causation .
In general terms, models may be developed to evaluate a specific variable based on other variable(s) contained within the dataset, with some residual error depending on the implemented model's accuracy ( e.g.
, Data = Model + Error).
Inferential statistics includes utilizing techniques that measure the relationships between particular variables.
For example, regression analysis may be used to model whether a change in advertising ( independent variable X ), provides an explanation for the variation in sales ( dependent variable Y ).
In mathematical terms, Y (sales) is a function of X (advertising).
It may be described as ( Y = aX + b + error), where the model is designed such that ( a ) and ( b ) minimize the error when the model predicts Y for a given range of values of X .
Analysts may also attempt to build models that are descriptive of the data, in an aim to simplify analysis and communicate results.
Data product   A data product is a computer application that takes data inputs and generates outputs , feeding them back into the environment.
It may be based on a model or algorithm.
For instance, an application that analyzes data about customer purchase history, and uses the results to recommend other purchases the customer might enjoy.
Communication   Data visualization is used to help understand the results after data is analyzed.
Main article: Data and information visualization  Once data is analyzed, it may be reported in many formats to the users of the analysis to support their requirements.
The users may have feedback, which results in additional analysis.
As such, much of the analytical cycle is iterative.
When determining how to communicate the results, the analyst may consider implementing a variety of data visualization techniques to help communicate the message more clearly and efficiently to the audience.
Data visualization uses information displays (graphics such as, tables and charts) to help communicate key messages contained in the data.
Tables are a valuable tool by enabling the ability of a user to query and focus on specific numbers; while charts (e.g., bar charts or line charts), may help explain the quantitative messages contained in the data.
Quantitative messages   Main article: Data and information visualization  A time series illustrated with a line chart demonstrating trends in U.S. federal spending and revenue over time.
A scatterplot illustrating the correlation between two variables (inflation and unemployment) measured at points in time.
Stephen Few described eight types of quantitative messages that users may attempt to understand or communicate from a set of data and the associated graphs used to help communicate the message.
Customers specifying requirements and analysts performing the data analysis may consider these messages during the course of the process.
Time-series: A single variable is captured over a period of time, such as the unemployment rate over a 10-year period.
A line chart may be used to demonstrate the trend.
Ranking: Categorical subdivisions are ranked in ascending or descending order, such as a ranking of sales performance (the measure ) by salespersons (the category , with each salesperson a categorical subdivision ) during a single period.
A bar chart may be used to show the comparison across the salespersons.
Part-to-whole: Categorical subdivisions are measured as a ratio to the whole (i.e., a percentage out of 100%).
A pie chart or bar chart can show the comparison of ratios, such as the market share represented by competitors in a market.
Deviation: Categorical subdivisions are compared against a reference, such as a comparison of actual vs.
budget expenses for several departments of a business for a given time period.
A bar chart can show the comparison of the actual versus the reference amount.
Frequency distribution: Shows the number of observations of a particular variable for a given interval, such as the number of years in which the stock market return is between intervals such as 0–10%, 11–20%, etc.
A histogram , a type of bar chart, may be used for this analysis.
Correlation: Comparison between observations represented by two variables (X,Y) to determine if they tend to move in the same or opposite directions.
For example, plotting unemployment (X) and inflation (Y) for a sample of months.
A scatter plot is typically used for this message.
Nominal comparison: Comparing categorical subdivisions in no particular order, such as the sales volume by product code.
A bar chart may be used for this comparison.
Geographic or geospatial: Comparison of a variable across a map or layout, such as the unemployment rate by state or the number of persons on the various floors of a building.
A cartogram is a typical graphic used.
Techniques for analyzing quantitative data   See also: Problem solving  Author Jonathan Koomey has recommended a series of best practices for understanding quantitative data.
These include:  Check raw data for anomalies prior to performing an analysis;  Re-perform important calculations, such as verifying columns of data that are formula driven;  Confirm main totals are the sum of subtotals;  Check relationships between numbers that should be related in a predictable way, such as ratios over time;  Normalize numbers to make comparisons easier, such as analyzing amounts per person or relative to GDP or as an index value relative to a base year;  Break problems into component parts by analyzing factors that led to the results, such as DuPont analysis of return on equity.
For the variables under examination, analysts typically obtain descriptive statistics for them, such as the mean (average), median , and standard deviation .
They may also analyze the distribution of the key variables to see how the individual values cluster around the mean.
An illustration of the MECE principle used for data analysis.
The consultants at McKinsey and Company named a technique for breaking a quantitative problem down into its component parts called the MECE principle .
Each layer can be broken down into its components; each of the sub-components must be mutually exclusive of each other and collectively add up to the layer above them.
The relationship is referred to as "Mutually Exclusive and Collectively Exhaustive" or MECE.
For example, profit by definition can be broken down into total revenue and total cost.
In turn, total revenue can be analyzed by its components, such as the revenue of divisions A, B, and C (which are mutually exclusive of each other) and should add to the total revenue (collectively exhaustive).
Analysts may use robust statistical measurements to solve certain analytical problems.
Hypothesis testing is used when a particular hypothesis about the true state of affairs is made by the analyst and data is gathered to determine whether that state of affairs is true or false.
For example, the hypothesis might be that "Unemployment has no effect on inflation", which relates to an economics concept called the Phillips Curve .
Hypothesis testing involves considering the likelihood of Type I and type II errors , which relate to whether the data supports accepting or rejecting the hypothesis.
Regression analysis may be used when the analyst is trying to determine the extent to which independent variable X affects dependent variable Y (e.g., "To what extent do changes in the unemployment rate (X) affect the inflation rate (Y)?").
This is an attempt to model or fit an equation line or curve to the data, such that Y is a function of X.
Necessary condition analysis (NCA) may be used when the analyst is trying to determine the extent to which independent variable X allows variable Y (e.g., "To what extent is a certain unemployment rate (X) necessary for a certain inflation rate (Y)?").
Whereas (multiple) regression analysis uses additive logic where each X-variable can produce the outcome and the X's can compensate for each other (they are sufficient but not necessary),   necessary condition analysis (NCA) uses necessity logic, where one or more X-variables allow the outcome to exist, but may not produce it (they are necessary but not sufficient).
Each single necessary condition must be present and compensation is not possible.
Analytical activities of data users   Analytic activities of data visualization users  Users may have particular data points of interest within a data set, as opposed to the general messaging outlined above.
Such low-level user analytic activities are presented in the following table.
The taxonomy can also be organized by three poles of activities: retrieving values, finding data points, and arranging data points.
#  Task  General Description  Pro Forma Abstract  Examples   1  Retrieve Value   Given a set of specific cases, find attributes of those cases.
What are the values of attributes {X, Y, Z, ...} in the data cases {A, B, C, ...}?
- What is the mileage per gallon of the Ford Mondeo?
- How long is the movie Gone with the Wind?
2  Filter   Given some concrete conditions on attribute values, find data cases satisfying those conditions.
Which data cases satisfy conditions {A, B, C...}?
- What Kellogg's cereals have high fiber?
- What comedies have won awards?
- Which funds underperformed the SP-500?
3  Compute Derived Value   Given a set of data cases, compute an aggregate numeric representation of those data cases.
What is the value of aggregation function F over a given set S of data cases?
- What is the average calorie content of Post cereals?
- What is the gross income of all stores combined?
- How many manufacturers of cars are there?
4  Find Extremum   Find data cases possessing an extreme value of an attribute over its range within the data set.
What are the top/bottom N data cases with respect to attribute A?
- What is the car with the highest MPG?
- What director/film has won the most awards?
- What Marvel Studios film has the most recent release date?
5  Sort   Given a set of data cases, rank them according to some ordinal metric.
What is the sorted order of a set S of data cases according to their value of attribute A?
- Order the cars by weight.
- Rank the cereals by calories.
6  Determine Range   Given a set of data cases and an attribute of interest, find the span of values within the set.
What is the range of values of attribute A in a set S of data cases?
- What is the range of film lengths?
- What is the range of car horsepowers?
- What actresses are in the data set?
7  Characterize Distribution   Given a set of data cases and a quantitative attribute of interest, characterize the distribution of that attribute's values over the set.
What is the distribution of values of attribute A in a set S of data cases?
- What is the distribution of carbohydrates in cereals?
- What is the age distribution of shoppers?
8  Find Anomalies   Identify any anomalies within a given set of data cases with respect to a given relationship or expectation, e.g.
statistical outliers.
Which data cases in a set S of data cases have unexpected/exceptional values?
- Are there exceptions to the relationship between horsepower and acceleration?
- Are there any outliers in protein?
9  Cluster   Given a set of data cases, find clusters of similar attribute values.
Which data cases in a set S of data cases are similar in value for attributes {X, Y, Z, ...}?
- Are there groups of cereals w/ similar fat/calories/sugar?
- Is there a cluster of typical film lengths?
10  Correlate   Given a set of data cases and two attributes, determine useful relationships between the values of those attributes.
What is the correlation between attributes X and Y over a given set S of data cases?
- Is there a correlation between carbohydrates and fat?
- Is there a correlation between country of origin and MPG?
- Do different genders have a preferred payment method?
- Is there a trend of increasing film length over the years?
11   Contextualization    Given a set of data cases, find contextual relevancy of the data to the users.
Which data cases in a set S of data cases are relevant to the current users' context?
- Are there groups of restaurants that have foods based on my current caloric intake?
Barriers to effective analysis   Barriers to effective analysis may exist among the analysts performing the data analysis or among the audience.
Distinguishing fact from opinion, cognitive biases, and innumeracy are all challenges to sound data analysis.
Confusing fact and opinion     You are entitled to your own opinion, but you are not entitled to your own facts.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan   Effective analysis requires obtaining relevant facts to answer questions, support a conclusion or formal opinion , or test hypotheses .
Facts by definition are irrefutable, meaning that any person involved in the analysis should be able to agree upon them.
For example, in August 2010, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that extending the Bush tax cuts of 2001 and 2003 for the 2011–2020 time period would add approximately $3.3 trillion to the national debt.
Everyone should be able to agree that indeed this is what CBO reported; they can all examine the report.
This makes it a fact.
Whether persons agree or disagree with the CBO is their own opinion.
As another example, the auditor of a public company must arrive at a formal opinion on whether financial statements of publicly traded corporations are "fairly stated, in all material respects".
This requires extensive analysis of factual data and evidence to support their opinion.
When making the leap from facts to opinions, there is always the possibility that the opinion is erroneous .
Cognitive biases   There are a variety of cognitive biases that can adversely affect analysis.
For example, confirmation bias is the tendency to search for or interpret information in a way that confirms one's preconceptions.
In addition, individuals may discredit information that does not support their views.
Analysts may be trained specifically to be aware of these biases and how to overcome them.
In his book Psychology of Intelligence Analysis , retired CIA analyst Richards Heuer wrote that analysts should clearly delineate their assumptions and chains of inference and specify the degree and source of the uncertainty involved in the conclusions.
He emphasized procedures to help surface and debate alternative points of view.
Innumeracy   Effective analysts are generally adept with a variety of numerical techniques.
However, audiences may not have such literacy with numbers or numeracy ; they are said to be innumerate.
Persons communicating the data may also be attempting to mislead or misinform, deliberately using bad numerical techniques.
For example, whether a number is rising or falling may not be the key factor.
More important may be the number relative to another number, such as the size of government revenue or spending relative to the size of the economy (GDP) or the amount of cost relative to revenue in corporate financial statements.
This numerical technique is referred to as normalization  or common-sizing.
There are many such techniques employed by analysts, whether adjusting for inflation (i.e., comparing real vs.
nominal data) or considering population increases, demographics, etc.
Analysts apply a variety of techniques to address the various quantitative messages described in the section above.
Analysts may also analyze data under different assumptions or scenario.
For example, when analysts perform financial statement analysis , they will often recast the financial statements under different assumptions to help arrive at an estimate of future cash flow, which they then discount to present value based on some interest rate, to determine the valuation of the company or its stock.
Similarly, the CBO analyzes the effects of various policy options on the government's revenue, outlays and deficits, creating alternative future scenarios for key measures.
Other topics   Smart buildings   A data analytics approach can be used in order to predict energy consumption in buildings.
The different steps of the data analysis process are carried out in order to realise smart buildings, where the building management and control operations including heating, ventilation, air conditioning, lighting and security are realised automatically by miming the needs of the building users and optimising resources like energy and time.
Analytics and business intelligence   Main article: Analytics  Analytics is the "extensive use of data, statistical and quantitative analysis, explanatory and predictive models, and fact-based management to drive decisions and actions."
It is a subset of business intelligence , which is a set of technologies and processes that uses data to understand and analyze business performance to drive decision-making .
Education   In education , most educators have access to a data system for the purpose of analyzing student data.
These data systems present data to educators in an over-the-counter data format (embedding labels, supplemental documentation, and a help system and making key package/display and content decisions) to improve the accuracy of educators’ data analyses.
Practitioner notes   This section contains rather technical explanations that may assist practitioners but are beyond the typical scope of a Wikipedia article.
Initial data analysis   The most important distinction between the initial data analysis phase and the main analysis phase, is that during initial data analysis one refrains from any analysis that is aimed at answering the original research question.
The initial data analysis phase is guided by the following four questions:    Quality of data   The quality of the data should be checked as early as possible.
Data quality can be assessed in several ways, using different types of analysis: frequency counts, descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, median), normality (skewness, kurtosis, frequency histograms), normal imputation is needed.
Analysis of extreme observations : outlying observations in the data are analyzed to see if they seem to disturb the distribution.
Comparison and correction of differences in coding schemes: variables are compared with coding schemes of variables external to the data set, and possibly corrected if coding schemes are not comparable.
Test for common-method variance .
The choice of analyses to assess the data quality during the initial data analysis phase depends on the analyses that will be conducted in the main analysis phase.
Quality of measurements   The quality of the measurement instruments should only be checked during the initial data analysis phase when this is not the focus or research question of the study.
One should check whether structure of measurement instruments corresponds to structure reported in the literature.
There are two ways to assess measurement quality:  Confirmatory factor analysis  Analysis of homogeneity ( internal consistency ), which gives an indication of the reliability of a measurement instrument.
During this analysis, one inspects the variances of the items and the scales, the Cronbach's α of the scales, and the change in the Cronbach's alpha when an item would be deleted from a scale   Initial transformations   After assessing the quality of the data and of the measurements, one might decide to impute missing data, or to perform initial transformations of one or more variables, although this can also be done during the main analysis phase.
Possible transformations of variables are:    Square root transformation (if the distribution differs moderately from normal)  Log-transformation (if the distribution differs substantially from normal)  Inverse transformation (if the distribution differs severely from normal)  Make categorical (ordinal / dichotomous) (if the distribution differs severely from normal, and no transformations help)  Did the implementation of the study fulfill the intentions of the research design?
One should check the success of the randomization procedure, for instance by checking whether background and substantive variables are equally distributed within and across groups.
If the study did not need or use a randomization procedure, one should check the success of the non-random sampling, for instance by checking whether all subgroups of the population of interest are represented in sample.
Other possible data distortions that should be checked are:  dropout (this should be identified during the initial data analysis phase)  Item non-response (whether this is random or not should be assessed during the initial data analysis phase)  Treatment quality (using manipulation checks ).
Characteristics of data sample   In any report or article, the structure of the sample must be accurately described.
It is especially important to exactly determine the structure of the sample (and specifically the size of the subgroups) when subgroup analyses will be performed during the main analysis phase.
The characteristics of the data sample can be assessed by looking at:  Basic statistics of important variables  Scatter plots  Correlations and associations  Cross-tabulations   Final stage of the initial data analysis   During the final stage, the findings of the initial data analysis are documented, and necessary, preferable, and possible corrective actions are taken.
Also, the original plan for the main data analyses can and should be specified in more detail or rewritten.
In order to do this, several decisions about the main data analyses can and should be made:  In the case of non- normals : should one transform variables; make variables categorical (ordinal/dichotomous); adapt the analysis method?
In the case of missing data : should one neglect or impute the missing data; which imputation technique should be used?
In the case of outliers : should one use robust analysis techniques?
In case items do not fit the scale: should one adapt the measurement instrument by omitting items, or rather ensure comparability with other (uses of the) measurement instrument(s)?
In the case of (too) small subgroups: should one drop the hypothesis about inter-group differences, or use small sample techniques, like exact tests or bootstrapping ?
In case the randomization procedure seems to be defective: can and should one calculate propensity scores and include them as covariates in the main analyses?
Analysis   Several analyses can be used during the initial data analysis phase:    Univariate statistics (single variable)  Bivariate associations (correlations)  Graphical techniques (scatter plots)  It is important to take the measurement levels of the variables into account for the analyses, as special statistical techniques are available for each level:    Nominal and ordinal variables Frequency counts (numbers and percentages)  Associations circumambulations (crosstabulations)  hierarchical loglinear analysis (restricted to a maximum of 8 variables)  loglinear analysis (to identify relevant/important variables and possible confounders)  Exact tests or bootstrapping (in case subgroups are small)  Computation of new variables  Continuous variables Distribution Statistics (M, SD, variance, skewness, kurtosis)  Stem-and-leaf displays  Box plots  Nonlinear analysis   Nonlinear analysis is often necessary when the data is recorded from a nonlinear system .
Nonlinear systems can exhibit complex dynamic effects including bifurcations , chaos , harmonics and subharmonics that cannot be analyzed using simple linear methods.
Nonlinear data analysis is closely related to nonlinear system identification .
Main data analysis   In the main analysis phase, analyses aimed at answering the research question are performed as well as any other relevant analysis needed to write the first draft of the research report.
Exploratory and confirmatory approaches   In the main analysis phase, either an exploratory or confirmatory approach can be adopted.
Usually the approach is decided before data is collected.
In an exploratory analysis no clear hypothesis is stated before analysing the data, and the data is searched for models that describe the data well.
In a confirmatory analysis clear hypotheses about the data are tested.
Exploratory data analysis should be interpreted carefully.
When testing multiple models at once there is a high chance on finding at least one of them to be significant, but this can be due to a type 1 error .
It is important to always adjust the significance level when testing multiple models with, for example, a Bonferroni correction .
Also, one should not follow up an exploratory analysis with a confirmatory analysis in the same dataset.
An exploratory analysis is used to find ideas for a theory, but not to test that theory as well.
When a model is found exploratory in a dataset, then following up that analysis with a confirmatory analysis in the same dataset could simply mean that the results of the confirmatory analysis are due to the same type 1 error that resulted in the exploratory model in the first place.
The confirmatory analysis therefore will not be more informative than the original exploratory analysis.
Stability of results   It is important to obtain some indication about how generalizable the results are.
While this is often difficult to check, one can look at the stability of the results.
Are the results reliable and reproducible?
There are two main ways of doing that.
Cross-validation .
By splitting the data into multiple parts, we can check if an analysis (like a fitted model) based on one part of the data generalizes to another part of the data as well.
Cross-validation is generally inappropriate, though, if there are correlations within the data, e.g.
with panel data .
Hence other methods of validation sometimes need to be used.
For more on this topic, see statistical model validation .
Sensitivity analysis .
A procedure to study the behavior of a system or model when global parameters are (systematically) varied.
One way to do that is via bootstrapping .
Free software for data analysis   Notable free software for data analysis include:  DevInfo – A database system endorsed by the United Nations Development Group for monitoring and analyzing human development.
ELKI – Data mining framework in Java with data mining oriented visualization functions.
KNIME – The Konstanz Information Miner, a user friendly and comprehensive data analytics framework.
Orange – A visual programming tool featuring interactive data visualization and methods for statistical data analysis, data mining , and machine learning .
Pandas – Python library for data analysis.
PAW – FORTRAN/C data analysis framework developed at CERN .
R – A programming language and software environment for statistical computing and graphics.
ROOT –  C++ data analysis framework developed at CERN .
SciPy – Python library for data analysis.
Julia – A programming language well-suited for numerical analysis and computational science.
Reproducible Analysis   The typical data analysis workflow involves collecting data, running analyses through various scripts, creating visualizations, and writing reports.
However, this workflow presents challenges, including a separation between analysis scripts and data, as well as a gap between analysis and documentation.
Often, the correct order of running scripts is only described informally or resides in the data scientist's memory.
The potential for losing this information creates issues for reproducibility.
To address these challenges, it is essential to have analysis scripts written for automated, reproducible workflows.
Additionally, dynamic documentation is crucial, providing reports that are understandable by both machines and humans, ensuring accurate representation of the analysis workflow even as scripts evolve.
International data analysis contests   Different companies or organizations hold data analysis contests to encourage researchers to utilize their data or to solve a particular question using data analysis.
A few examples of well-known international data analysis contests are as follows:    Kaggle competition, which is held by Kaggle .
LTPP data analysis contest held by FHWA and ASCE .
Method of statistical inference  Part of a series on Bayesian statistics  Posterior = Likelihood × Prior ÷ Evidence  Background  Bayesian inference  Bayesian probability  Bayes' theorem  Bernstein–von Mises theorem  Coherence  Cox's theorem  Cromwell's rule  Principle of indifference  Principle of maximum entropy  Model building  Weak prior ...
Strong prior  Conjugate prior  Linear regression  Empirical Bayes  Hierarchical model  Posterior approximation  Markov chain Monte Carlo  Laplace's approximation  Integrated nested Laplace approximations  Variational inference  Approximate Bayesian computation  Estimators  Bayesian estimator  Credible interval  Maximum a posteriori estimation  Evidence approximation  Evidence lower bound  Nested sampling  Model evaluation  Bayes factor  Model averaging  Posterior predictive    Mathematics portal v t e  Bayesian inference ( / ˈ b eɪ z i ən /  BAY -zee-ən or / ˈ b eɪ ʒ ən /  BAY -zhən )  is a method of statistical inference in which Bayes' theorem is used to update the probability for a hypothesis as more evidence or information becomes available.
Fundamentally, Bayesian inference uses prior knowledge, in the form of a prior distribution in order to estimate posterior probabilities.
Bayesian inference is an important technique in statistics , and especially in mathematical statistics .
Bayesian updating is particularly important in the dynamic analysis of a sequence of data .
Bayesian inference has found application in a wide range of activities, including science , engineering , philosophy , medicine , sport , and law .
In the philosophy of decision theory , Bayesian inference is closely related to subjective probability, often called " Bayesian probability ".
Introduction to Bayes' rule   A geometric visualisation of Bayes' theorem.
In the table, the values 2, 3, 6 and 9 give the relative weights of each corresponding condition and case.
The figures denote the cells of the table involved in each metric, the probability being the fraction of each figure that is shaded.
This shows that P(A|B) P(B) = P(B|A) P(A) i.e.
P(A|B) = P(B|A) P(A) / P(B) .
Similar reasoning can be used to show that P(¬A|B) = P(B|¬A) P(¬A) / P(B) etc.
Main article: Bayes' theorem  See also: Bayesian probability  Formal explanation   Contingency table   Hypothesis Evidence  Satisfies hypothesis H  Violates hypothesis ¬H   Total   Has evidence E  P(H|E)·P(E) = P(E|H)·P(H)  P(¬H|E)·P(E) = P(E|¬H)·P(¬H)  P(E)    No evidence ¬E  P(H|¬E)·P(¬E) = P(¬E|H)·P(H)  P(¬H|¬E)·P(¬E) = P(¬E|¬H)·P(¬H)  P(¬E) = 1−P(E)       Total  P(H)  P(¬H) = 1−P(H)  1  Bayesian inference derives the posterior probability as a consequence of two antecedents : a prior probability and a " likelihood function " derived from a statistical model for the observed data.
Bayesian inference computes the posterior probability according to Bayes' theorem :     P  (  H  ∣  E  )  =     P  (  E  ∣  H  )  ⋅  P  (  H  )    P  (  E  )     ,    {\displaystyle P(H\mid E)={\frac {P(E\mid H)\cdot P(H)}{P(E)}},}   where      H    {\displaystyle H}   stands for any hypothesis whose probability may be affected by data (called evidence below).
Often there are competing hypotheses, and the task is to determine which is the most probable.
P  (  H  )    {\displaystyle P(H)}   , the prior probability , is the estimate of the probability of the hypothesis     H    {\displaystyle H}    before the data     E    {\displaystyle E}   , the current evidence, is observed.
E    {\displaystyle E}   , the evidence , corresponds to new data that were not used in computing the prior probability.
P  (  H  ∣  E  )    {\displaystyle P(H\mid E)}   , the posterior probability , is the probability of     H    {\displaystyle H}    given      E    {\displaystyle E}   , i.e., after      E    {\displaystyle E}   is observed.
This is what we want to know: the probability of a hypothesis given the observed evidence.
P  (  E  ∣  H  )    {\displaystyle P(E\mid H)}   is the probability of observing     E    {\displaystyle E}    given      H    {\displaystyle H}   and is called the likelihood .
As a function of     E    {\displaystyle E}   with     H    {\displaystyle H}   fixed, it indicates the compatibility of the evidence with the given hypothesis.
The likelihood function is a function of the evidence,     E    {\displaystyle E}   , while the posterior probability is a function of the hypothesis,     H    {\displaystyle H}   .
P  (  E  )    {\displaystyle P(E)}   is sometimes termed the marginal likelihood or "model evidence".
This factor is the same for all possible hypotheses being considered (as is evident from the fact that the hypothesis     H    {\displaystyle H}   does not appear anywhere in the symbol, unlike for all the other factors) and hence does not factor into determining the relative probabilities of different hypotheses.
P  (  E  )  >  0    {\displaystyle P(E)>0}   (Else one has     0   /   0    {\displaystyle 0/0}   .)
For different values of     H    {\displaystyle H}   , only the factors     P  (  H  )    {\displaystyle P(H)}   and     P  (  E  ∣  H  )    {\displaystyle P(E\mid H)}   , both in the numerator, affect the value of     P  (  H  ∣  E  )    {\displaystyle P(H\mid E)}   –  the posterior probability of a hypothesis is proportional to its prior probability (its inherent likeliness) and the newly acquired likelihood (its compatibility with the new observed evidence).
In cases where     ¬  H    {\displaystyle \neg H}   ("not     H    {\displaystyle H}   "), the logical negation of     H    {\displaystyle H}   , is a valid likelihood, Bayes' rule can be rewritten as follows:         P  (  H  ∣  E  )     =     P  (  E  ∣  H  )  P  (  H  )    P  (  E  )           =     P  (  E  ∣  H  )  P  (  H  )    P  (  E  ∣  H  )  P  (  H  )  +  P  (  E  ∣  ¬  H  )  P  (  ¬  H  )           =    1   1  +   (     1   P  (  H  )     −  1   )      P  (  E  ∣  ¬  H  )    P  (  E  ∣  H  )              {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P(H\mid E)&={\frac {P(E\mid H)P(H)}{P(E)}}\\&={\frac {P(E\mid H)P(H)}{P(E\mid H)P(H)+P(E\mid \neg H)P(\neg H)}}\\&={\frac {1}{1+\left({\frac {1}{P(H)}}-1\right){\frac {P(E\mid \neg H)}{P(E\mid H)}}}}\end{aligned}}}   because     P  (  E  )  =  P  (  E  ∣  H  )  P  (  H  )  +  P  (  E  ∣  ¬  H  )  P  (  ¬  H  )    {\displaystyle P(E)=P(E\mid H)P(H)+P(E\mid \neg H)P(\neg H)}   and     P  (  H  )  +  P  (  ¬  H  )  =  1.
{\displaystyle P(H)+P(\neg H)=1.}
One quick and easy way to remember the equation would be to use rule of multiplication :     P  (  E  ∩  H  )  =  P  (  E  ∣  H  )  P  (  H  )  =  P  (  H  ∣  E  )  P  (  E  )  .
{\displaystyle P(E\cap H)=P(E\mid H)P(H)=P(H\mid E)P(E).}
Alternatives to Bayesian updating   Bayesian updating is widely used and computationally convenient.
However, it is not the only updating rule that might be considered rational.
Ian Hacking noted that traditional " Dutch book " arguments did not specify Bayesian updating: they left open the possibility that non-Bayesian updating rules could avoid Dutch books.
Hacking wrote:  "And neither the Dutch book argument nor any other in the personalist arsenal of proofs of the probability axioms entails the dynamic assumption.
Not one entails Bayesianism.
So the personalist requires the dynamic assumption to be Bayesian.
It is true that in consistency a personalist could abandon the Bayesian model of learning from experience.
Salt could lose its savour."
Indeed, there are non-Bayesian updating rules that also avoid Dutch books (as discussed in the literature on " probability kinematics ") following the publication of Richard C.
Jeffrey 's rule, which applies Bayes' rule to the case where the evidence itself is assigned a probability.
The additional hypotheses needed to uniquely require Bayesian updating have been deemed to be substantial, complicated, and unsatisfactory.
Inference over exclusive and exhaustive possibilities   If evidence is simultaneously used to update belief over a set of exclusive and exhaustive propositions, Bayesian inference may be thought of as acting on this belief distribution as a whole.
General formulation   Diagram illustrating event space     Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   in general formulation of Bayesian inference.
Although this diagram shows discrete models and events, the continuous case may be visualized similarly using probability densities.
Suppose a process is generating independent and identically distributed events      E   n    ,    n  =  1  ,  2  ,  3  ,  …    {\displaystyle E_{n},\ n=1,2,3,\ldots }   , but the probability distribution is unknown.
Let the event space     Ω    {\displaystyle \Omega }   represent the current state of belief for this process.
Each model is represented by event      M   m      {\displaystyle M_{m}}   .
The conditional probabilities     P  (   E   n    ∣   M   m    )    {\displaystyle P(E_{n}\mid M_{m})}   are specified to define the models.
P  (   M   m    )    {\displaystyle P(M_{m})}   is the degree of belief in      M   m      {\displaystyle M_{m}}   .
Before the first inference step,     {  P  (   M   m    )  }    {\displaystyle \{P(M_{m})\}}   is a set of initial prior probabilities .
These must sum to 1, but are otherwise arbitrary.
Suppose that the process is observed to generate     E  ∈  {   E   n    }    {\displaystyle E\in \{E_{n}\}}   .
For each     M  ∈  {   M   m    }    {\displaystyle M\in \{M_{m}\}}   , the prior     P  (  M  )    {\displaystyle P(M)}   is updated to the posterior     P  (  M  ∣  E  )    {\displaystyle P(M\mid E)}   .
From Bayes' theorem :       P  (  M  ∣  E  )  =     P  (  E  ∣  M  )     ∑   m     P  (  E  ∣   M   m    )  P  (   M   m    )      ⋅  P  (  M  )  .
{\displaystyle P(M\mid E)={\frac {P(E\mid M)}{\sum _{m}{P(E\mid M_{m})P(M_{m})}}}\cdot P(M).}
Upon observation of further evidence, this procedure may be repeated.
Multiple observations   For a sequence of independent and identically distributed observations      E   =  (   e   1    ,  …  ,   e   n    )    {\displaystyle \mathbf {E} =(e_{1},\dots ,e_{n})}   , it can be shown by induction that repeated application of the above is equivalent to     P  (  M  ∣   E   )  =     P  (   E   ∣  M  )     ∑   m     P  (   E   ∣   M   m    )  P  (   M   m    )      ⋅  P  (  M  )  ,    {\displaystyle P(M\mid \mathbf {E} )={\frac {P(\mathbf {E} \mid M)}{\sum _{m}{P(\mathbf {E} \mid M_{m})P(M_{m})}}}\cdot P(M),}   where     P  (   E   ∣  M  )  =   ∏   k     P  (   e   k    ∣  M  )   .
{\displaystyle P(\mathbf {E} \mid M)=\prod _{k}{P(e_{k}\mid M)}.}
Parametric formulation: motivating the formal description   By parameterizing the space of models, the belief in all models may be updated in a single step.
The distribution of belief over the model space may then be thought of as a distribution of belief over the parameter space.
The distributions in this section are expressed as continuous, represented by probability densities, as this is the usual situation.
The technique is, however, equally applicable to discrete distributions.
Let the vector      θ     {\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {\theta }}}   span the parameter space.
Let the initial prior distribution over      θ     {\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {\theta }}}   be     p  (   θ   ∣   α   )    {\displaystyle p({\boldsymbol {\theta }}\mid {\boldsymbol {\alpha }})}   , where      α     {\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {\alpha }}}   is a set of parameters to the prior itself, or hyperparameters .
Let      E   =  (   e   1    ,  …  ,   e   n    )    {\displaystyle \mathbf {E} =(e_{1},\dots ,e_{n})}   be a sequence of independent and identically distributed event observations, where all      e   i      {\displaystyle e_{i}}   are distributed as     p  (  e  ∣   θ   )    {\displaystyle p(e\mid {\boldsymbol {\theta }})}   for some      θ     {\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {\theta }}}   .
Bayes' theorem is applied to find the posterior distribution over      θ     {\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {\theta }}}   :         p  (   θ   ∣   E   ,   α   )     =     p  (   E   ∣   θ   ,   α   )    p  (   E   ∣   α   )     ⋅  p  (   θ   ∣   α   )        =     p  (   E   ∣   θ   ,   α   )    ∫  p  (   E   ∣   θ   ,   α   )  p  (   θ   ∣   α   )   d   θ      ⋅  p  (   θ   ∣   α   )  ,        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}p({\boldsymbol {\theta }}\mid \mathbf {E} ,{\boldsymbol {\alpha }})&={\frac {p(\mathbf {E} \mid {\boldsymbol {\theta }},{\boldsymbol {\alpha }})}{p(\mathbf {E} \mid {\boldsymbol {\alpha }})}}\cdot p({\boldsymbol {\theta }}\mid {\boldsymbol {\alpha }})\\&={\frac {p(\mathbf {E} \mid {\boldsymbol {\theta }},{\boldsymbol {\alpha }})}{\int p(\mathbf {E} \mid {\boldsymbol {\theta }},{\boldsymbol {\alpha }})p({\boldsymbol {\theta }}\mid {\boldsymbol {\alpha }})\,d{\boldsymbol {\theta }}}}\cdot p({\boldsymbol {\theta }}\mid {\boldsymbol {\alpha }}),\end{aligned}}}   where     p  (   E   ∣   θ   ,   α   )  =   ∏   k    p  (   e   k    ∣   θ   )  .
{\displaystyle p(\mathbf {E} \mid {\boldsymbol {\theta }},{\boldsymbol {\alpha }})=\prod _{k}p(e_{k}\mid {\boldsymbol {\theta }}).}
Formal description of Bayesian inference   Definitions       x    {\displaystyle x}   , a data point in general.
This may in fact be a vector of values.
θ    {\displaystyle \theta }   , the parameter of the data point's distribution, i.e.,     x  ∼  p  (  x  ∣  θ  )    {\displaystyle x\sim p(x\mid \theta )}   .
This may be a vector of parameters.
α    {\displaystyle \alpha }   , the hyperparameter of the parameter distribution, i.e.,     θ  ∼  p  (  θ  ∣  α  )    {\displaystyle \theta \sim p(\theta \mid \alpha )}   .
This may be a vector of hyperparameters.
X     {\displaystyle \mathbf {X} }   is the sample, a set of     n    {\displaystyle n}   observed data points, i.e.,      x   1    ,  …  ,   x   n      {\displaystyle x_{1},\ldots ,x_{n}}   .
x  ~       {\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}}   , a new data point whose distribution is to be predicted.
Bayesian inference   The prior distribution is the distribution of the parameter(s) before any data is observed, i.e.
p  (  θ  ∣  α  )    {\displaystyle p(\theta \mid \alpha )}   .
The prior distribution might not be easily determined; in such a case, one possibility may be to use the Jeffreys prior to obtain a prior distribution before updating it with newer observations.
The sampling distribution is the distribution of the observed data conditional on its parameters, i.e.
p  (   X   ∣  θ  )    {\displaystyle p(\mathbf {X} \mid \theta )}   .
This is also termed the likelihood , especially when viewed as a function of the parameter(s), sometimes written     L  ⁡  (  θ  ∣   X   )  =  p  (   X   ∣  θ  )    {\displaystyle \operatorname {L} (\theta \mid \mathbf {X} )=p(\mathbf {X} \mid \theta )}   .
The marginal likelihood (sometimes also termed the evidence ) is the distribution of the observed data marginalized over the parameter(s), i.e.
p  (   X   ∣  α  )  =  ∫  p  (   X   ∣  θ  )  p  (  θ  ∣  α  )  d  θ  .
{\displaystyle p(\mathbf {X} \mid \alpha )=\int p(\mathbf {X} \mid \theta )p(\theta \mid \alpha )d\theta .}
It quantifies the agreement between data and expert opinion, in a geometric sense that can be made precise.
If the marginal likelihood is 0 then there is no agreement between the data and expert opinion and Bayes' rule cannot be applied.
The posterior distribution is the distribution of the parameter(s) after taking into account the observed data.
This is determined by Bayes' rule , which forms the heart of Bayesian inference:     p  (  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )  =     p  (  θ  ,   X   ,  α  )    p  (   X   ,  α  )     =     p  (   X   ∣  θ  ,  α  )  p  (  θ  ,  α  )    p  (   X   ∣  α  )  p  (  α  )     =     p  (   X   ∣  θ  ,  α  )  p  (  θ  ∣  α  )    p  (   X   ∣  α  )     ∝  p  (   X   ∣  θ  ,  α  )  p  (  θ  ∣  α  )  .
{\displaystyle p(\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )={\frac {p(\theta ,\mathbf {X} ,\alpha )}{p(\mathbf {X} ,\alpha )}}={\frac {p(\mathbf {X} \mid \theta ,\alpha )p(\theta ,\alpha )}{p(\mathbf {X} \mid \alpha )p(\alpha )}}={\frac {p(\mathbf {X} \mid \theta ,\alpha )p(\theta \mid \alpha )}{p(\mathbf {X} \mid \alpha )}}\propto p(\mathbf {X} \mid \theta ,\alpha )p(\theta \mid \alpha ).}
This is expressed in words as "posterior is proportional to likelihood times prior", or sometimes as "posterior = likelihood times prior, over evidence".
In practice, for almost all complex Bayesian models used in machine learning, the posterior distribution     p  (  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )    {\displaystyle p(\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )}   is not obtained in a closed form distribution, mainly because the parameter space for     θ    {\displaystyle \theta }   can be very high, or the Bayesian model retains certain hierarchical structure formulated from the observations      X     {\displaystyle \mathbf {X} }   and parameter     θ    {\displaystyle \theta }   .
In such situations, we need to resort to approximation techniques.
General case: Let      P   Y    x      {\displaystyle P_{Y}^{x}}   be the conditional distribution of     Y    {\displaystyle Y}   given     X  =  x    {\displaystyle X=x}   and let      P   X      {\displaystyle P_{X}}   be the distribution of     X    {\displaystyle X}   .
The joint distribution is then      P   X  ,  Y    (  d  x  ,  d  y  )  =   P   Y    x    (  d  y  )   P   X    (  d  x  )    {\displaystyle P_{X,Y}(dx,dy)=P_{Y}^{x}(dy)P_{X}(dx)}   .
The conditional distribution      P   X    y      {\displaystyle P_{X}^{y}}   of     X    {\displaystyle X}   given     Y  =  y    {\displaystyle Y=y}   is then determined by       P   X    y    (  A  )  =  E  (   1   A    (  X  )   |   Y  =  y  )    {\displaystyle P_{X}^{y}(A)=E(1_{A}(X)|Y=y)}   Existence and uniqueness of the needed conditional expectation is a consequence of the Radon–Nikodym theorem .
This was formulated by Kolmogorov in his famous book from 1933.
Kolmogorov underlines the importance of conditional probability by writing "I wish to call attention to  ...
and especially the theory of conditional probabilities and conditional expectations ..." in the Preface.
The Bayes theorem determines the posterior distribution from the prior distribution.
Uniqueness requires continuity assumptions.
Bayes' theorem can be generalized to include improper prior distributions such as the uniform distribution on the real line.
Modern Markov chain Monte Carlo methods have boosted the importance of Bayes' theorem including cases with improper priors.
Bayesian prediction   The posterior predictive distribution is the distribution of a new data point, marginalized over the posterior:     p  (     x  ~     ∣   X   ,  α  )  =  ∫  p  (     x  ~     ∣  θ  )  p  (  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )  d  θ    {\displaystyle p({\tilde {x}}\mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )=\int p({\tilde {x}}\mid \theta )p(\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )d\theta }    The prior predictive distribution is the distribution of a new data point, marginalized over the prior:     p  (     x  ~     ∣  α  )  =  ∫  p  (     x  ~     ∣  θ  )  p  (  θ  ∣  α  )  d  θ    {\displaystyle p({\tilde {x}}\mid \alpha )=\int p({\tilde {x}}\mid \theta )p(\theta \mid \alpha )d\theta }    Bayesian theory calls for the use of the posterior predictive distribution to do predictive inference , i.e., to predict the distribution of a new, unobserved data point.
That is, instead of a fixed point as a prediction, a distribution over possible points is returned.
Only this way is the entire posterior distribution of the parameter(s) used.
By comparison, prediction in frequentist statistics often involves finding an optimum point estimate of the parameter(s)—e.g., by maximum likelihood or maximum a posteriori estimation (MAP)—and then plugging this estimate into the formula for the distribution of a data point.
This has the disadvantage that it does not account for any uncertainty in the value of the parameter, and hence will underestimate the variance of the predictive distribution.
In some instances, frequentist statistics can work around this problem.
For example, confidence intervals and prediction intervals in frequentist statistics when constructed from a normal distribution with unknown mean and variance are constructed using a Student's t-distribution .
This correctly estimates the variance, due to the facts that (1) the average of normally distributed random variables is also normally distributed, and (2) the predictive distribution of a normally distributed data point with unknown mean and variance, using conjugate or uninformative priors, has a Student's t-distribution.
In Bayesian statistics, however, the posterior predictive distribution can always be determined exactly—or at least to an arbitrary level of precision when numerical methods are used.
Both types of predictive distributions have the form of a compound probability distribution (as does the marginal likelihood ).
In fact, if the prior distribution is a conjugate prior , such that the prior and posterior distributions come from the same family, it can be seen that both prior and posterior predictive distributions also come from the same family of compound distributions.
The only difference is that the posterior predictive distribution uses the updated values of the hyperparameters (applying the Bayesian update rules given in the conjugate prior article), while the prior predictive distribution uses the values of the hyperparameters that appear in the prior distribution.
Mathematical properties   This section includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .
Please help to improve this section by introducing more precise citations.
( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Interpretation of factor          P  (  E  ∣  M  )    P  (  E  )     >  1  ⇒  P  (  E  ∣  M  )  >  P  (  E  )    {\textstyle {\frac {P(E\mid M)}{P(E)}}>1\Rightarrow P(E\mid M)>P(E)}   .
That is, if the model were true, the evidence would be more likely than is predicted by the current state of belief.
The reverse applies for a decrease in belief.
If the belief does not change,        P  (  E  ∣  M  )    P  (  E  )     =  1  ⇒  P  (  E  ∣  M  )  =  P  (  E  )    {\textstyle {\frac {P(E\mid M)}{P(E)}}=1\Rightarrow P(E\mid M)=P(E)}   .
That is, the evidence is independent of the model.
If the model were true, the evidence would be exactly as likely as predicted by the current state of belief.
Cromwell's rule   Main article: Cromwell's rule  If     P  (  M  )  =  0    {\displaystyle P(M)=0}   then     P  (  M  ∣  E  )  =  0    {\displaystyle P(M\mid E)=0}   .
If     P  (  M  )  =  1    {\displaystyle P(M)=1}   and     P  (  E  )  >  0    {\displaystyle P(E)>0}   , then     P  (  M   |   E  )  =  1    {\displaystyle P(M|E)=1}   .
This can be interpreted to mean that hard convictions are insensitive to counter-evidence.
The former follows directly from Bayes' theorem.
The latter can be derived by applying the first rule to the event "not     M    {\displaystyle M}   " in place of "     M    {\displaystyle M}   ", yielding "if     1  −  P  (  M  )  =  0    {\displaystyle 1-P(M)=0}   , then     1  −  P  (  M  ∣  E  )  =  0    {\displaystyle 1-P(M\mid E)=0}   ", from which the result immediately follows.
Asymptotic behaviour of posterior   Consider the behaviour of a belief distribution as it is updated a large number of times with independent and identically distributed trials.
For sufficiently nice prior probabilities, the Bernstein-von Mises theorem gives that in the limit of infinite trials, the posterior converges to a Gaussian distribution independent of the initial prior under some conditions firstly outlined and rigorously proven by Joseph L.
Doob in 1948, namely if the random variable in consideration has a finite probability space .
The more general results were obtained later by the statistician David A.
Freedman who published in two seminal research papers in 1963  and 1965  when and under what circumstances the asymptotic behaviour of posterior is guaranteed.
His 1963 paper treats, like Doob (1949), the finite case and comes to a satisfactory conclusion.
However, if the random variable has an infinite but countable probability space (i.e., corresponding to a die with infinite many faces) the 1965 paper demonstrates that for a dense subset of priors the Bernstein-von Mises theorem is not applicable.
In this case there is almost surely no asymptotic convergence.
Later in the 1980s and 1990s Freedman and Persi Diaconis continued to work on the case of infinite countable probability spaces.
To summarise, there may be insufficient trials to suppress the effects of the initial choice, and especially for large (but finite) systems the convergence might be very slow.
Conjugate priors   Main article: Conjugate prior  In parameterized form, the prior distribution is often assumed to come from a family of distributions called conjugate priors .
The usefulness of a conjugate prior is that the corresponding posterior distribution will be in the same family, and the calculation may be expressed in closed form .
Estimates of parameters and predictions   It is often desired to use a posterior distribution to estimate a parameter or variable.
Several methods of Bayesian estimation select measurements of central tendency from the posterior distribution.
For one-dimensional problems, a unique median exists for practical continuous problems.
The posterior median is attractive as a robust estimator .
If there exists a finite mean for the posterior distribution, then the posterior mean is a method of estimation.
θ  ~     =  E  ⁡    =  ∫  θ   p  (  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )   d  θ    {\displaystyle {\tilde {\theta }}=\operatorname {E} =\int \theta \,p(\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )\,d\theta }    Taking a value with the greatest probability defines maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates:       {   θ   MAP    }  ⊂  arg  ⁡   max   θ    p  (  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )  .
{\displaystyle \{\theta _{\text{MAP}}\}\subset \arg \max _{\theta }p(\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha ).}
There are examples where no maximum is attained, in which case the set of MAP estimates is empty .
There are other methods of estimation that minimize the posterior risk (expected-posterior loss) with respect to a loss function , and these are of interest to statistical decision theory using the sampling distribution ("frequentist statistics").
The posterior predictive distribution of a new observation        x  ~       {\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}}   (that is independent of previous observations) is determined by       p  (     x  ~      |    X   ,  α  )  =  ∫  p  (     x  ~     ,  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )   d  θ  =  ∫  p  (     x  ~     ∣  θ  )  p  (  θ  ∣   X   ,  α  )   d  θ  .
{\displaystyle p({\tilde {x}}|\mathbf {X} ,\alpha )=\int p({\tilde {x}},\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )\,d\theta =\int p({\tilde {x}}\mid \theta )p(\theta \mid \mathbf {X} ,\alpha )\,d\theta .}
Examples   Probability of a hypothesis   Contingency table   Bowl Cookie   #1 H 1  #2 H 2   Total   Plain, E   30  20  50    Choc, ¬ E   10  20  30   Total  40  40  80   P ( H 1 | E ) = 30 / 50 = 0.6  Suppose there are two full bowls of cookies.
Bowl #1 has 10 chocolate chip and 30 plain cookies, while bowl #2 has 20 of each.
Our friend Fred picks a bowl at random, and then picks a cookie at random.
We may assume there is no reason to believe Fred treats one bowl differently from another, likewise for the cookies.
The cookie turns out to be a plain one.
How probable is it that Fred picked it out of bowl #1?
Intuitively, it seems clear that the answer should be more than a half, since there are more plain cookies in bowl #1.
The precise answer is given by Bayes' theorem.
Let      H   1      {\displaystyle H_{1}}   correspond to bowl #1, and      H   2      {\displaystyle H_{2}}   to bowl #2.
It is given that the bowls are identical from Fred's point of view, thus     P  (   H   1    )  =  P  (   H   2    )    {\displaystyle P(H_{1})=P(H_{2})}   , and the two must add up to 1, so both are equal to 0.5.
The event     E    {\displaystyle E}   is the observation of a plain cookie.
From the contents of the bowls, we know that     P  (  E  ∣   H   1    )  =  30   /   40  =  0.75    {\displaystyle P(E\mid H_{1})=30/40=0.75}   and     P  (  E  ∣   H   2    )  =  20   /   40  =  0.5.
{\displaystyle P(E\mid H_{2})=20/40=0.5.}
Bayes' formula then yields         P  (   H   1    ∣  E  )     =     P  (  E  ∣   H   1    )   P  (   H   1    )    P  (  E  ∣   H   1    )   P  (   H   1    )   +   P  (  E  ∣   H   2    )   P  (   H   2    )                 =     0.75  ×  0.5    0.75  ×  0.5  +  0.5  ×  0.5                 =  0.6        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P(H_{1}\mid E)&={\frac {P(E\mid H_{1})\,P(H_{1})}{P(E\mid H_{1})\,P(H_{1})\;+\;P(E\mid H_{2})\,P(H_{2})}}\\\\\ &={\frac {0.75\times 0.5}{0.75\times 0.5+0.5\times 0.5}}\\\\\ &=0.6\end{aligned}}}    Before we observed the cookie, the probability we assigned for Fred having chosen bowl #1 was the prior probability,     P  (   H   1    )    {\displaystyle P(H_{1})}   , which was 0.5.
After observing the cookie, we must revise the probability to     P  (   H   1    ∣  E  )    {\displaystyle P(H_{1}\mid E)}   , which is 0.6.
Making a prediction   Example results for archaeology example.
This simulation was generated using c=15.2.
An archaeologist is working at a site thought to be from the medieval period, between the 11th century to the 16th century.
However, it is uncertain exactly when in this period the site was inhabited.
Fragments of pottery are found, some of which are glazed and some of which are decorated.
It is expected that if the site were inhabited during the early medieval period, then 1% of the pottery would be glazed and 50% of its area decorated, whereas if it had been inhabited in the late medieval period then 81% would be glazed and 5% of its area decorated.
How confident can the archaeologist be in the date of inhabitation as fragments are unearthed?
The degree of belief in the continuous variable     C    {\displaystyle C}   (century) is to be calculated, with the discrete set of events     {  G  D  ,  G     D  ¯     ,     G  ¯     D  ,     G  ¯        D  ¯     }    {\displaystyle \{GD,G{\bar {D}},{\bar {G}}D,{\bar {G}}{\bar {D}}\}}   as evidence.
Assuming linear variation of glaze and decoration with time, and that these variables are independent,     P  (  E  =  G  D  ∣  C  =  c  )  =  (  0.01  +     0.81  −  0.01    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )  (  0.5  −     0.5  −  0.05    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )    {\displaystyle P(E=GD\mid C=c)=(0.01+{\frac {0.81-0.01}{16-11}}(c-11))(0.5-{\frac {0.5-0.05}{16-11}}(c-11))}        P  (  E  =  G     D  ¯     ∣  C  =  c  )  =  (  0.01  +     0.81  −  0.01    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )  (  0.5  +     0.5  −  0.05    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )    {\displaystyle P(E=G{\bar {D}}\mid C=c)=(0.01+{\frac {0.81-0.01}{16-11}}(c-11))(0.5+{\frac {0.5-0.05}{16-11}}(c-11))}        P  (  E  =     G  ¯     D  ∣  C  =  c  )  =  (  (  1  −  0.01  )  −     0.81  −  0.01    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )  (  0.5  −     0.5  −  0.05    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )    {\displaystyle P(E={\bar {G}}D\mid C=c)=((1-0.01)-{\frac {0.81-0.01}{16-11}}(c-11))(0.5-{\frac {0.5-0.05}{16-11}}(c-11))}        P  (  E  =     G  ¯        D  ¯     ∣  C  =  c  )  =  (  (  1  −  0.01  )  −     0.81  −  0.01    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )  (  0.5  +     0.5  −  0.05    16  −  11     (  c  −  11  )  )    {\displaystyle P(E={\bar {G}}{\bar {D}}\mid C=c)=((1-0.01)-{\frac {0.81-0.01}{16-11}}(c-11))(0.5+{\frac {0.5-0.05}{16-11}}(c-11))}    Assume a uniform prior of      f   C    (  c  )  =  0.2    {\textstyle f_{C}(c)=0.2}   , and that trials are independent and identically distributed .
When a new fragment of type     e    {\displaystyle e}   is discovered, Bayes' theorem is applied to update the degree of belief for each     c    {\displaystyle c}   :      f   C    (  c  ∣  E  =  e  )  =     P  (  E  =  e  ∣  C  =  c  )    P  (  E  =  e  )      f   C    (  c  )  =     P  (  E  =  e  ∣  C  =  c  )     ∫   11    16     P  (  E  =  e  ∣  C  =  c  )   f   C    (  c  )  d  c       f   C    (  c  )    {\displaystyle f_{C}(c\mid E=e)={\frac {P(E=e\mid C=c)}{P(E=e)}}f_{C}(c)={\frac {P(E=e\mid C=c)}{\int _{11}^{16}{P(E=e\mid C=c)f_{C}(c)dc}}}f_{C}(c)}    A computer simulation of the changing belief as 50 fragments are unearthed is shown on the graph.
In the simulation, the site was inhabited around 1420, or     c  =  15.2    {\displaystyle c=15.2}   .
By calculating the area under the relevant portion of the graph for 50 trials, the archaeologist can say that there is practically no chance the site was inhabited in the 11th and 12th centuries, about 1% chance that it was inhabited during the 13th century, 63% chance during the 14th century and 36% during the 15th century.
The Bernstein-von Mises theorem asserts here the asymptotic convergence to the "true" distribution because the probability space corresponding to the discrete set of events     {  G  D  ,  G     D  ¯     ,     G  ¯     D  ,     G  ¯        D  ¯     }    {\displaystyle \{GD,G{\bar {D}},{\bar {G}}D,{\bar {G}}{\bar {D}}\}}   is finite (see above section on asymptotic behaviour of the posterior).
In frequentist statistics and decision theory   A decision-theoretic justification of the use of Bayesian inference was given by Abraham Wald , who proved that every unique Bayesian procedure is admissible .
Conversely, every admissible statistical procedure is either a Bayesian procedure or a limit of Bayesian procedures.
Wald characterized admissible procedures as Bayesian procedures (and limits of Bayesian procedures), making the Bayesian formalism a central technique in such areas of frequentist inference as parameter estimation , hypothesis testing , and computing confidence intervals .
For example:  "Under some conditions, all admissible procedures are either Bayes procedures or limits of Bayes procedures (in various senses).
These remarkable results, at least in their original form, are due essentially to Wald.
They are useful because the property of being Bayes is easier to analyze than admissibility."
"In decision theory, a quite general method for proving admissibility consists in exhibiting a procedure as a unique Bayes solution."
"In the first chapters of this work, prior distributions with finite support and the corresponding Bayes procedures were used to establish some of the main theorems relating to the comparison of experiments.
Bayes procedures with respect to more general prior distributions have played a very important role in the development of statistics, including its asymptotic theory."
"There are many problems where a glance at posterior distributions, for suitable priors, yields immediately interesting information.
Also, this technique can hardly be avoided in sequential analysis."
"A useful fact is that any Bayes decision rule obtained by taking a proper prior over the whole parameter space must be admissible"   "An important area of investigation in the development of admissibility ideas has been that of conventional sampling-theory procedures, and many interesting results have been obtained."
Model selection   Main article: Bayesian model selection  See also: Bayesian information criterion  Bayesian methodology also plays a role in model selection where the aim is to select one model from a set of competing models that represents most closely the underlying process that generated the observed data.
In Bayesian model comparison, the model with the highest posterior probability given the data is selected.
The posterior probability of a model depends on the evidence, or marginal likelihood , which reflects the probability that the data is generated by the model, and on the prior belief of the model.
When two competing models are a priori considered to be equiprobable, the ratio of their posterior probabilities corresponds to the Bayes factor .
Since Bayesian model comparison is aimed on selecting the model with the highest posterior probability, this methodology is also referred to as the maximum a posteriori (MAP) selection rule  or the MAP probability rule.
Probabilistic programming   Main article: Probabilistic programming  While conceptually simple, Bayesian methods can be mathematically and numerically challenging.
Probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) implement functions to easily build Bayesian models together with efficient automatic inference methods.
This helps separate the model building from the inference, allowing practitioners to focus on their specific problems and leaving PPLs to handle the computational details for them.
Applications   Statistical data analysis   See the separate Wikipedia entry on Bayesian statistics , specifically the statistical modeling section in that page.
Computer applications   Bayesian inference has applications in artificial intelligence and expert systems .
Bayesian inference techniques have been a fundamental part of computerized pattern recognition techniques since the late 1950s.
There is also an ever-growing connection between Bayesian methods and simulation-based Monte Carlo techniques since complex models cannot be processed in closed form by a Bayesian analysis, while a graphical model structure may allow for efficient simulation algorithms like the Gibbs sampling and other Metropolis–Hastings algorithm schemes.
Recently  Bayesian inference has gained popularity among the phylogenetics community for these reasons; a number of applications allow many demographic and evolutionary parameters to be estimated simultaneously.
As applied to statistical classification , Bayesian inference has been used to develop algorithms for identifying e-mail spam .
Applications which make use of Bayesian inference for spam filtering include CRM114 , DSPAM , Bogofilter , SpamAssassin , SpamBayes , Mozilla , XEAMS, and others.
Spam classification is treated in more detail in the article on the naïve Bayes classifier .
Solomonoff's Inductive inference is the theory of prediction based on observations; for example, predicting the next symbol based upon a given series of symbols.
The only assumption is that the environment follows some unknown but computable probability distribution .
It is a formal inductive framework that combines two well-studied principles of inductive inference: Bayesian statistics and Occam's Razor .
Solomonoff's universal prior probability of any prefix p of a computable sequence x is the sum of the probabilities of all programs (for a universal computer) that compute something starting with p .
Given some p and any computable but unknown probability distribution from which x is sampled, the universal prior and Bayes' theorem can be used to predict the yet unseen parts of x in optimal fashion.
Bioinformatics and healthcare applications   Bayesian inference has been applied in different Bioinformatics applications, including differential gene expression analysis.
Bayesian inference is also used in a general cancer risk model, called CIRI (Continuous Individualized Risk Index), where serial measurements are incorporated to update a Bayesian model which is primarily built from prior knowledge.
In the courtroom   Main article: Jurimetrics § Bayesian analysis of evidence  Bayesian inference can be used by jurors to coherently accumulate the evidence for and against a defendant, and to see whether, in totality, it meets their personal threshold for " beyond a reasonable doubt ".
Bayes' theorem is applied successively to all evidence presented, with the posterior from one stage becoming the prior for the next.
The benefit of a Bayesian approach is that it gives the juror an unbiased, rational mechanism for combining evidence.
It may be appropriate to explain Bayes' theorem to jurors in odds form , as betting odds are more widely understood than probabilities.
Alternatively, a logarithmic approach , replacing multiplication with addition, might be easier for a jury to handle.
Adding up evidence  If the existence of the crime is not in doubt, only the identity of the culprit, it has been suggested that the prior should be uniform over the qualifying population.
For example, if 1,000 people could have committed the crime, the prior probability of guilt would be 1/1000.
The use of Bayes' theorem by jurors is controversial.
In the United Kingdom, a defence expert witness explained Bayes' theorem to the jury in R v Adams .
The jury convicted, but the case went to appeal on the basis that no means of accumulating evidence had been provided for jurors who did not wish to use Bayes' theorem.
The Court of Appeal upheld the conviction, but it also gave the opinion that "To introduce Bayes' Theorem, or any similar method, into a criminal trial plunges the jury into inappropriate and unnecessary realms of theory and complexity, deflecting them from their proper task."
Gardner-Medwin  argues that the criterion on which a verdict in a criminal trial should be based is not the probability of guilt, but rather the probability of the evidence, given that the defendant is innocent (akin to a frequentist  p-value ).
He argues that if the posterior probability of guilt is to be computed by Bayes' theorem, the prior probability of guilt must be known.
This will depend on the incidence of the crime, which is an unusual piece of evidence to consider in a criminal trial.
Consider the following three propositions:  A – the known facts and testimony could have arisen if the defendant is guilty.
B – the known facts and testimony could have arisen if the defendant is innocent.
C – the defendant is guilty.
Gardner-Medwin argues that the jury should believe both A and not- B in order to convict.
A and not- B implies the truth of C , but the reverse is not true.
It is possible that B and C are both true, but in this case he argues that a jury should acquit, even though they know that they will be letting some guilty people go free.
See also Lindley's paradox .
Bayesian epistemology   Bayesian epistemology is a movement that advocates for Bayesian inference as a means of justifying the rules of inductive logic.
Karl Popper and David Miller have rejected the idea of Bayesian rationalism, i.e.
using Bayes rule to make epistemological inferences:  It is prone to the same vicious circle as any other justificationist epistemology, because it presupposes what it attempts to justify.
According to this view, a rational interpretation of Bayesian inference would see it merely as a probabilistic version of falsification , rejecting the belief, commonly held by Bayesians, that high likelihood achieved by a series of Bayesian updates would prove the hypothesis beyond any reasonable doubt, or even with likelihood greater than 0.
Other   The scientific method is sometimes interpreted as an application of Bayesian inference.
In this view, Bayes' rule guides (or should guide) the updating of probabilities about hypotheses conditional on new observations or experiments .
The Bayesian inference has also been applied to treat stochastic scheduling problems with incomplete information by Cai et al.
Bayesian search theory is used to search for lost objects.
Bayesian inference in phylogeny  Bayesian tool for methylation analysis  Bayesian approaches to brain function investigate the brain as a Bayesian mechanism.
Bayesian inference in ecological studies    Bayesian inference is used to estimate parameters in stochastic chemical kinetic models   Bayesian inference in econophysics for currency or stock market prediction    Bayesian inference in marketing  Bayesian inference in motor learning  Bayesian inference is used in probabilistic numerics to solve numerical problems  Bayes and Bayesian inference   The problem considered by Bayes in Proposition 9 of his essay, " An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances ", is the posterior distribution for the parameter a (the success rate) of the binomial distribution .
History   Main article: History of statistics § Bayesian statistics  The term Bayesian refers to Thomas Bayes (1701–1761), who proved that probabilistic limits could be placed on an unknown event.
However, it was Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827) who introduced (as Principle VI) what is now called Bayes' theorem and used it to address problems in celestial mechanics , medical statistics, reliability , and jurisprudence .
Early Bayesian inference, which used uniform priors following Laplace's principle of insufficient reason , was called " inverse probability " (because it infers backwards from observations to parameters, or from effects to causes  ).
After the 1920s, "inverse probability" was largely supplanted  by a collection of methods that came to be called frequentist statistics .
In the 20th century, the ideas of Laplace were further developed in two different directions, giving rise to objective and subjective currents in Bayesian practice.
In the objective or "non-informative" current, the statistical analysis depends on only the model assumed, the data analyzed,  and the method assigning the prior, which differs from one objective Bayesian practitioner to another.
In the subjective or "informative" current, the specification of the prior depends on the belief (that is, propositions on which the analysis is prepared to act), which can summarize information from experts, previous studies, etc.
In the 1980s, there was a dramatic growth in research and applications of Bayesian methods, mostly attributed to the discovery of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, which removed many of the computational problems, and an increasing interest in nonstandard, complex applications.
Despite growth of Bayesian research, most undergraduate teaching is still based on frequentist statistics.
Nonetheless, Bayesian methods are widely accepted and used, such as for example in the field of machine learning .
Application of mathematical methods to problems in physics  Part of a series on Mathematics  History  Outline  Index   Areas  Number theory  Geometry  Algebra  Calculus and Analysis  Discrete mathematics  Logic and Set theory  Probability  Statistics and Decision theory   Relationship with sciences  Physics  Chemistry  Geosciences  Computation  Biology  Linguistics  Economics  Philosophy  Education     Mathematics Portal v t e  Part of a series on Physics The fundamental science   Index  Outline  Glossary    History ( timeline )   Branches  Acoustics  Astrophysics  Atomic physics  Biophysics  Classical physics  Electromagnetism  Geophysics  Mechanics  Modern physics  Nuclear physics  Optics  Thermodynamics   Research  Physicist ( list )  List of physics awards  List of journals  List of unsolved problems    Physics portal   Category v t e  An example of mathematical physics: solutions of Schrödinger's equation for quantum harmonic oscillators (left) with their amplitudes (right).
Mathematical physics refers to the development of mathematical methods for application to problems in physics .
The Journal of Mathematical Physics defines the field as "the application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods suitable for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories".
An alternative definition would also include those mathematics that are inspired by physics, known as physical mathematics .
Scope   There are several distinct branches of mathematical physics, and these roughly correspond to particular historical parts of our world.
Classical mechanics   Main articles: Lagrangian mechanics and Hamiltonian mechanics  Applying the techniques of mathematical physics to classical mechanics typically involves the rigorous, abstract, and advanced reformulation of Newtonian mechanics in terms of Lagrangian mechanics and Hamiltonian mechanics (including both approaches in the presence of constraints).
Both formulations are embodied in analytical mechanics and lead to an understanding of the deep interplay between the notions of symmetry and conserved quantities during the dynamical evolution of mechanical systems, as embodied within the most elementary formulation of Noether's theorem .
These approaches and ideas have been extended to other areas of physics, such as statistical mechanics , continuum mechanics , classical field theory , and quantum field theory .
Moreover, they have provided multiple examples and ideas in differential geometry (e.g., several notions in symplectic geometry and vector bundles ).
Partial differential equations   Main article: Partial differential equations  Within mathematics proper, the theory of partial differential equation , variational calculus , Fourier analysis , potential theory , and vector analysis are perhaps most closely associated with mathematical physics.
These fields were developed intensively from the second half of the 18th century (by, for example, D'Alembert , Euler , and Lagrange ) until the 1930s.
Physical applications of these developments include hydrodynamics , celestial mechanics , continuum mechanics , elasticity theory , acoustics , thermodynamics , electricity , magnetism , and aerodynamics .
Quantum theory   Main article: Quantum mechanics  The theory of atomic spectra (and, later, quantum mechanics ) developed almost concurrently with some parts of the mathematical fields of linear algebra , the spectral theory of operators , operator algebras and, more broadly, functional analysis .
Nonrelativistic quantum mechanics includes Schrödinger operators, and it has connections to atomic and molecular physics .
Quantum information theory is another subspecialty.
Relativity and quantum relativistic theories   Main articles: Theory of relativity and Quantum field theory  The special and general theories of relativity require a rather different type of mathematics.
This was group theory , which played an important role in both quantum field theory and differential geometry .
This was, however, gradually supplemented by topology and functional analysis in the mathematical description of cosmological as well as quantum field theory phenomena.
In the mathematical description of these physical areas, some concepts in homological algebra and category theory  are also important.
Statistical mechanics   Main article: Statistical mechanics  Statistical mechanics forms a separate field, which includes the theory of phase transitions .
It relies upon the Hamiltonian mechanics (or its quantum version) and it is closely related with the more mathematical ergodic theory and some parts of probability theory .
There are increasing interactions between combinatorics and physics , in particular statistical physics.
Usage   Relationship between mathematics and physics  The usage of the term "mathematical physics" is sometimes idiosyncratic .
Certain parts of mathematics that initially arose from the development of physics are not, in fact, considered parts of mathematical physics, while other closely related fields are.
For example, ordinary differential equations and symplectic geometry are generally viewed as purely mathematical disciplines, whereas dynamical systems and Hamiltonian mechanics belong to mathematical physics.
John Herapath used the term for the title of his 1847 text on "mathematical principles of natural philosophy", the scope at that time being 
"the causes of heat, gaseous elasticity, gravitation, and other great phenomena of nature".
Mathematical vs.
theoretical physics   The term "mathematical physics" is sometimes used to denote research aimed at studying and solving problems in physics or thought experiments within a mathematically rigorous framework.
In this sense, mathematical physics covers a very broad academic realm distinguished only by the blending of some mathematical aspect and theoretical physics aspect.
Although related to theoretical physics ,  mathematical physics in this sense emphasizes the mathematical rigour of the similar type as found in mathematics.
On the other hand, theoretical physics emphasizes the links to observations and experimental physics , which often requires theoretical physicists (and mathematical physicists in the more general sense) to use heuristic , intuitive , or approximate arguments.
Such arguments are not considered rigorous by mathematicians.
Such mathematical physicists primarily expand and elucidate physical theories .
Because of the required level of mathematical rigour, these researchers often deal with questions that theoretical physicists have considered to be already solved.
However, they can sometimes show that the previous solution was incomplete, incorrect, or simply too naïve.
Issues about attempts to infer the second law of thermodynamics from statistical mechanics are examples.
Other examples concern the subtleties involved with synchronisation procedures in special and general relativity ( Sagnac effect and Einstein synchronisation ).
The effort to put physical theories on a mathematically rigorous footing not only developed physics but also has influenced developments of some mathematical areas.
For example, the development of quantum mechanics and some aspects of functional analysis parallel each other in many ways.
The mathematical study of quantum mechanics , quantum field theory , and quantum statistical mechanics has motivated results in operator algebras .
The attempt to construct a rigorous mathematical formulation of quantum field theory has also brought about some progress in fields such as representation theory .
Prominent mathematical physicists   Before Newton   There is a tradition of mathematical analysis of nature that goes back to the ancient Greeks; examples include Euclid ( Optics ), Archimedes ( On the Equilibrium of Planes , On Floating Bodies ), and Ptolemy ( Optics , Harmonics ).
Later, Islamic and Byzantine scholars built on these works, and these ultimately were reintroduced or became available to the West in the 12th century and during the Renaissance .
In the first decade of the 16th century, amateur astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus proposed heliocentrism , and published a treatise on it in 1543.
He retained the Ptolemaic idea of epicycles , and merely sought to simplify astronomy by constructing simpler sets of epicyclic orbits.
Epicycles consist of circles upon circles.
According to Aristotelian physics , the circle was the perfect form of motion, and was the intrinsic motion of Aristotle's fifth element —the quintessence or universal essence known in Greek as aether for the English pure air —that was the pure substance beyond the sublunary sphere , and thus was celestial entities' pure composition.
The German Johannes Kepler , Tycho Brahe 's assistant, modified Copernican orbits to ellipses , formalized in the equations of Kepler's laws of planetary motion .
An enthusiastic atomist, Galileo Galilei in his 1623 book The Assayer asserted that the "book of nature is written in mathematics".
His 1632 book, about his telescopic observations, supported heliocentrism.
Having introduced experimentation, Galileo then refuted geocentric cosmology by refuting Aristotelian physics itself.
Galileo's 1638 book Discourse on Two New Sciences established the law of equal free fall as well as the principles of inertial motion, founding the central concepts of what would become today's classical mechanics .
By the Galilean law of inertia as well as the principle of Galilean invariance , also called Galilean relativity, for any object experiencing inertia, there is empirical justification for knowing only that it is at relative rest or relative motion—rest or motion with respect to another object.
René Descartes famously developed a complete system of heliocentric cosmology anchored on the principle of vortex motion, Cartesian physics , whose widespread acceptance brought the demise of Aristotelian physics.
Descartes sought to formalize mathematical reasoning in science, and developed Cartesian coordinates for geometrically plotting locations in 3D space and marking their progressions along the flow of time.
An older contemporary of Newton, Christiaan Huygens , was the first to idealize a physical problem by a set of parameters and the first to fully mathematize a mechanistic explanation of unobservable physical phenomena, and for these reasons Huygens is considered the first theoretical physicist and one of the founders of modern mathematical physics.
Newtonian and post Newtonian   In this era, important concepts in calculus such as the fundamental theorem of calculus (proved in 1668 by Scottish mathematician James Gregory  ) and finding extrema and minima of functions via differentiation using Fermat's theorem (by French mathematician Pierre de Fermat ) were already known before Leibniz and Newton.
Isaac Newton (1642–1727) developed some concepts in calculus (although Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz developed similar concepts outside the context of physics) and Newton's method to solve problems in physics.
He was extremely successful in his application of calculus to the theory of motion.
Newton's theory of motion, shown in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, published in 1687,  modeled three Galilean laws of motion along with Newton's law of universal gravitation on a framework of absolute space —hypothesized by Newton as a physically real entity of Euclidean geometric structure extending infinitely in all directions—while presuming absolute time , supposedly justifying knowledge of absolute motion, the object's motion with respect to absolute space.
The principle of Galilean invariance/relativity was merely implicit in Newton's theory of motion.
Having ostensibly reduced the Keplerian celestial laws of motion as well as Galilean terrestrial laws of motion to a unifying force, Newton achieved great mathematical rigor, but with theoretical laxity.
In the 18th century, the Swiss Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782) made contributions to fluid dynamics , and vibrating strings .
The Swiss Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) did special work in variational calculus , dynamics, fluid dynamics, and other areas.
Also notable was the Italian-born Frenchman, Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736–1813) for work in analytical mechanics : he formulated Lagrangian mechanics ) and variational methods.
A major contribution to the formulation of Analytical Dynamics called Hamiltonian dynamics was also made by the Irish physicist, astronomer and mathematician, William Rowan Hamilton (1805-1865).
Hamiltonian dynamics had played an important role in the formulation of modern theories in physics, including field theory and quantum mechanics.
The French mathematical physicist Joseph Fourier (1768 – 1830) introduced the notion of Fourier series to solve the heat equation , giving rise to a new approach to solving partial differential equations by means of integral transforms .
Into the early 19th century, following mathematicians in France, Germany and England had contributed to mathematical physics.
The French Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827) made paramount contributions to mathematical astronomy , potential theory .
Siméon Denis Poisson (1781–1840) worked in analytical mechanics and potential theory .
In Germany, Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) made key contributions to the theoretical foundations of electricity , magnetism , mechanics , and fluid dynamics .
In England, George Green (1793-1841) published An Essay on the Application of Mathematical Analysis to the Theories of Electricity and Magnetism in 1828, which in addition to its significant contributions to mathematics made early progress towards laying down the mathematical foundations of electricity and magnetism.
A couple of decades ahead of Newton's publication of a particle theory of light, the Dutch Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) developed the wave theory of light, published in 1690.
By 1804, Thomas Young 's double-slit experiment revealed an interference pattern, as though light were a wave, and thus Huygens's wave theory of light, as well as Huygens's inference that light waves were vibrations of the luminiferous aether , was accepted.
Jean-Augustin Fresnel modeled hypothetical behavior of the aether.
The English physicist Michael Faraday introduced the theoretical concept of a field—not action at a distance.
Mid-19th century, the Scottish James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) reduced electricity and magnetism to Maxwell's electromagnetic field theory, whittled down by others to the four Maxwell's equations .
Initially, optics was found consequent of  Maxwell's field.
Later, radiation and then today's known electromagnetic spectrum were found also consequent of  this electromagnetic field.
The English physicist Lord Rayleigh  worked on sound .
The Irishmen William Rowan Hamilton (1805–1865), George Gabriel Stokes (1819–1903) and Lord Kelvin (1824–1907) produced several major works: Stokes was a leader in optics and fluid dynamics; Kelvin made substantial discoveries in thermodynamics ; Hamilton did notable work on analytical mechanics , discovering a new and powerful approach nowadays known as Hamiltonian mechanics .
Very relevant contributions to this approach are due to his German colleague mathematician Carl Gustav Jacobi (1804–1851) in particular referring to canonical transformations .
The German Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894) made substantial contributions in the fields of electromagnetism , waves, fluids , and sound.
In the United States, the pioneering work of Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903) became the basis for statistical mechanics .
Fundamental theoretical results in this area were achieved by the German Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906).
Together, these individuals laid the foundations of electromagnetic theory, fluid dynamics, and statistical mechanics.
Relativistic   By the 1880s, there was a prominent paradox that an observer within Maxwell's electromagnetic field measured it at approximately constant speed, regardless of the observer's speed relative to other objects within the electromagnetic field.
Thus, although the observer's speed was continually lost  relative to the electromagnetic field, it was preserved relative to other objects in the electromagnetic field.
And yet no violation of Galilean invariance within physical interactions among objects was detected.
As Maxwell's electromagnetic field was modeled as oscillations of the aether , physicists inferred that motion within the aether resulted in aether drift , shifting the electromagnetic field, explaining the observer's missing speed relative to it.
The Galilean transformation had been the mathematical process used to translate the positions in one reference frame to predictions of positions in another reference frame, all plotted on Cartesian coordinates , but this process was replaced by Lorentz transformation , modeled by the Dutch Hendrik Lorentz .
In 1887, experimentalists Michelson and Morley failed to detect aether drift, however.
It was hypothesized that motion into the aether prompted aether's shortening, too, as modeled in the Lorentz contraction .
It was hypothesized that the aether thus kept Maxwell's electromagnetic field aligned with the principle of Galilean invariance across all inertial frames of reference , while Newton's theory of motion was spared.
Austrian theoretical physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach criticized Newton's postulated absolute space.
Mathematician Jules-Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) questioned even absolute time.
In 1905, Pierre Duhem published a devastating criticism of the foundation of Newton's theory of motion.
Also in 1905, Albert Einstein (1879–1955) published his special theory of relativity , newly explaining both the electromagnetic field's invariance and Galilean invariance by discarding all hypotheses concerning aether, including the existence of aether itself.
Refuting the framework of Newton's theory— absolute space and absolute time —special relativity refers to relative space and relative time , whereby length contracts and time dilates along the travel pathway of an object.
In 1908, Einstein's former mathematics professor Hermann Minkowski modeled 3D space together with the 1D axis of time by treating the temporal axis like a fourth spatial dimension—altogether 4D spacetime—and declared the imminent demise of the separation of space and time.
Einstein initially called this "superfluous learnedness", but later used Minkowski spacetime with great elegance in his general theory of relativity ,  extending invariance to all reference frames—whether perceived as inertial or as accelerated—and credited this to Minkowski, by then deceased.
General relativity replaces Cartesian coordinates with Gaussian coordinates , and replaces Newton's claimed empty yet Euclidean space traversed instantly by Newton's vector of hypothetical gravitational force—an instant action at a distance —with a gravitational field .
The gravitational field is Minkowski spacetime itself, the 4D topology of Einstein aether modeled on a Lorentzian manifold that "curves" geometrically, according to the Riemann curvature tensor .
The concept of Newton's gravity: "two masses attract each other" replaced by the geometrical argument: "mass transform curvatures of spacetime and free falling particles with mass move along a geodesic curve in the spacetime" ( Riemannian geometry already existed before the 1850s, by mathematicians Carl Friedrich Gauss and Bernhard Riemann in search for intrinsic geometry and non-Euclidean geometry.
), in the vicinity of either mass or energy.
(Under special relativity—a special case of general relativity—even massless energy exerts gravitational effect by its mass equivalence locally "curving" the geometry of the four, unified dimensions of space and time.)
Quantum   Another revolutionary development of the 20th century was quantum theory , which emerged from the seminal contributions of Max Planck (1856–1947) (on black-body radiation ) and Einstein's work on the photoelectric effect .
In 1912, a mathematician Henri Poincare published Sur la théorie des quanta .
He introduced the first non-naïve definition of quantization in this paper.
The development of early quantum physics followed by a heuristic framework devised by Arnold Sommerfeld (1868–1951) and Niels Bohr (1885–1962), but this was soon replaced by the quantum mechanics developed by Max Born (1882–1970), Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976), Paul Dirac (1902–1984), Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961), Satyendra Nath Bose (1894–1974), and Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958).
This revolutionary theoretical framework is based on a probabilistic interpretation of states, and evolution and measurements in terms of self-adjoint operators on an infinite-dimensional vector space.
That is called Hilbert space (introduced by mathematicians David Hilbert (1862–1943), Erhard Schmidt (1876–1959) and Frigyes Riesz (1880–1956) in search of generalization of Euclidean space and study of integral equations), and rigorously defined within the axiomatic modern version by John von Neumann in his celebrated book Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics , where he built up a relevant part of modern functional analysis on Hilbert spaces, the spectral theory (introduced by David Hilbert who investigated quadratic forms with infinitely many variables.
Many years later, it had been revealed that his spectral theory is associated with the spectrum of the hydrogen atom.
He was surprised by this application.)
in particular.
Paul Dirac used algebraic constructions to produce a relativistic model for the electron , predicting its magnetic moment and the existence of its antiparticle, the positron .
List of prominent contributors to mathematical physics in the 20th century   Prominent contributors to the 20th century's mathematical physics include (ordered by birth date):  William Thomson (Lord Kelvin)   Oliver Heaviside   Jules Henri Poincaré   David Hilbert   Arnold Sommerfeld   Constantin Carathéodory   Albert Einstein   Max Born   George David Birkhoff   Hermann Weyl   Satyendra Nath Bose   Norbert Wiener   John Lighton Synge   Mário Schenberg   Wolfgang Pauli   Paul Dirac   Eugene Wigner   Andrey Kolmogorov   Lars Onsager   John von Neumann   Sin-Itiro Tomonaga   Hideki Yukawa   Nikolay Nikolayevich Bogolyubov   Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar   Mark Kac   Julian Schwinger   Richard Phillips Feynman   Irving Ezra Segal   Ryogo Kubo   Arthur Strong Wightman   Chen-Ning Yang   Rudolf Haag   Freeman John Dyson   Martin Gutzwiller   Abdus Salam   Jürgen Moser   Michael Francis Atiyah   Joel Louis Lebowitz   Roger Penrose   Elliott Hershel Lieb   Yakir Aharonov   Sheldon Glashow   Steven Weinberg   Ludvig Dmitrievich Faddeev   David Ruelle   Yakov Grigorevich Sinai   Vladimir Igorevich Arnold   Arthur Michael Jaffe   Roman Wladimir Jackiw   Leonard Susskind   Rodney James Baxter   Michael Victor Berry   Giovanni Gallavotti   Stephen William Hawking   Jerrold Eldon Marsden   Michael C.
Reed   John Michael Kosterlitz   Israel Michael Sigal   Alexander Markovich Polyakov   Barry Simon   Herbert Spohn   John Lawrence Cardy   Giorgio Parisi   Abhay Ashtekar   Edward Witten   F.
Duncan Haldane   Ashoke Sen   Juan Martín Maldacena  Study of subatomic particles and forces    Standard Model of particle physics Elementary particles of the Standard Model  Background Particle physics Standard Model Quantum field theory   Gauge theory   Spontaneous symmetry breaking  Higgs mechanism   Constituents Electroweak interaction  Quantum chromodynamics  CKM matrix Standard Model mathematics   Limitations Strong CP problem Hierarchy problem Neutrino oscillations Physics beyond the Standard Model   Scientists  Rutherford  Thomson  Chadwick  Bose  Sudarshan  Davis Jr  Anderson  Fermi  Dirac  Feynman  Rubbia  Gell-Mann  Kendall  Taylor  Friedman  Powell  Anderson  Glashow  Iliopoulos  Lederman  Maiani  Meer  Cowan  Nambu  Chamberlain  Cabibbo  Schwartz  Perl  Majorana  Weinberg  Lee  Ward  Salam  Kobayashi  Maskawa  Mills  Yang  Yukawa  't Hooft  Veltman  Gross  Pais  Pauli  Politzer  Reines  Schwinger  Wilczek  Cronin  Fitch  Vleck  Higgs  Englert  Brout  Hagen  Guralnik  Kibble  de Mayolo  Lattes  Zweig  v t e  Particle physics or high-energy physics is the study of fundamental particles and forces that constitute matter and radiation .
The field also studies combinations of elementary particles up to the scale of protons and neutrons , while the study of combination of protons and neutrons is called nuclear physics .
The fundamental particles in the universe are classified in the Standard Model as fermions (matter particles) and bosons (force-carrying particles).
There are three generations of fermions,  although ordinary matter is made only from the first fermion generation.
The first generation consists of up and down quarks which form protons and neutrons ,  and electrons and electron neutrinos .
The three fundamental interactions known to be mediated by bosons are electromagnetism , the weak interaction , and the strong interaction .
Quarks cannot exist on their own but form hadrons .
Hadrons that contain an odd number of quarks are called baryons and those that contain an even number are called mesons .
Two baryons, the proton and the neutron , make up most of the mass of ordinary matter.
Mesons are unstable and the longest-lived last for only a few hundredths of a microsecond .
They occur after collisions between particles made of quarks, such as fast-moving protons and neutrons in cosmic rays .
Mesons are also produced in cyclotrons or other particle accelerators .
Particles have corresponding antiparticles with the same mass but with opposite electric charges .
For example, the antiparticle of the electron is the positron .
The electron has a negative electric charge, the positron has a positive charge.
These antiparticles can theoretically form a corresponding form of matter called antimatter .
Some particles, such as the photon , are their own antiparticle.
These elementary particles are excitations of the quantum fields that also govern their interactions.
The dominant theory explaining these fundamental particles and fields, along with their dynamics, is called the Standard Model .
The reconciliation of gravity to the current particle physics theory is not solved; many theories have addressed this problem, such as loop quantum gravity , string theory and supersymmetry theory .
Practical particle physics is the study of these particles in radioactive processes and in particle accelerators such as the Large Hadron Collider .
Theoretical particle physics is the study of these particles in the context of cosmology and quantum theory .
The two are closely interrelated: the Higgs boson was postulated by theoretical particle physicists and its presence confirmed by practical experiments.
History   Main article: History of subatomic physics  The Geiger–Marsden experiments observed that a small fraction of the alpha particles experienced strong deflection when being struck by the gold foil.
The idea that all matter is fundamentally composed of elementary particles dates from at least the 6th century BC.
In the 19th century, John Dalton , through his work on stoichiometry , concluded that each element of nature was composed of a single, unique type of particle.
The word atom , after the Greek word atomos meaning "indivisible", has since then denoted the smallest particle of a chemical element , but physicists later discovered that atoms are not, in fact, the fundamental particles of nature, but are conglomerates of even smaller particles, such as the electron .
The early 20th century explorations of nuclear physics and quantum physics led to proofs of nuclear fission in 1939 by Lise Meitner (based on experiments by Otto Hahn ), and nuclear fusion by Hans Bethe in that same year; both discoveries also led to the development of nuclear weapons .
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, a bewildering variety of particles was found in collisions of particles from beams of increasingly high energy.
It was referred to informally as the " particle zoo ".
Important discoveries such as the CP violation by James Cronin and Val Fitch brought new questions to matter-antimatter imbalance .
After the formulation of the Standard Model during the 1970s, physicists clarified the origin of the particle zoo.
The large number of particles was explained as combinations of a (relatively) small number of more fundamental particles and framed in the context of quantum field theories .
This reclassification marked the beginning of modern particle physics.
Standard Model   Main article: Standard Model  The current state of the classification of all elementary particles is explained by the Standard Model , which gained widespread acceptance in the mid-1970s after experimental confirmation of the existence of quarks .
It describes the strong , weak , and electromagnetic  fundamental interactions , using mediating gauge bosons .
The species of gauge bosons are eight gluons , W − , W + and Z bosons , and the photon .
The Standard Model also contains 24 fundamental  fermions (12 particles and their associated anti-particles), which are the constituents of all matter .
Finally, the Standard Model also predicted the existence of a type of boson known as the Higgs boson .
On 4 July 2012, physicists with the Large Hadron Collider at CERN announced they had found a new particle that behaves similarly to what is expected from the Higgs boson.
The Standard Model, as currently formulated, has 61 elementary particles.
Those elementary particles can combine to form composite particles, accounting for the hundreds of other species of particles that have been discovered since the 1960s.
The Standard Model has been found to agree with almost all the experimental tests conducted to date.
However, most particle physicists believe that it is an incomplete description of nature and that a more fundamental theory awaits discovery (See Theory of Everything ).
In recent years, measurements of neutrino  mass have provided the first experimental deviations from the Standard Model, since neutrinos do not have mass in the Standard Model.
Subatomic particles   Elementary Particles    Types   Generations   Antiparticle   Colours   Total   Quarks   2  3  Pair  3  36   Leptons   Pair  None  12   Gluons   1  None  Own  8   8   Photon   Own  None  1   Z Boson   Own  1   W Boson   Pair  2   Higgs   Own  1   Total number of (known) elementary particles:  61   Modern particle physics research is focused on subatomic particles , including atomic constituents, such as electrons , protons , and neutrons (protons and neutrons are composite particles called baryons , made of quarks ), that are produced by radioactive and scattering processes; such particles are photons , neutrinos , and muons , as well as a wide range of exotic particles .
All particles and their interactions observed to date can be described almost entirely by the Standard Model.
Dynamics of particles are also governed by quantum mechanics ; they exhibit wave–particle duality , displaying particle-like behaviour under certain experimental conditions and wave -like behaviour in others.
In more technical terms, they are described by quantum state vectors in a Hilbert space , which is also treated in quantum field theory .
Following the convention of particle physicists, the term elementary particles is applied to those particles that are, according to current understanding, presumed to be indivisible and not composed of other particles.
Quarks and leptons   Main articles: Quark and Lepton  A Feynman diagram of the β − decay , showing a neutron (n, udd) converted into a proton (p, udu).
"u" and "d" are the up and down quarks , " e − " is the electron , and " ν e " is the electron antineutrino .
Ordinary matter is made from first- generation quarks ( up , down ) and leptons ( electron , electron neutrino ).
Collectively, quarks and leptons are called fermions , because they have a quantum spin of half-integers (-1/2, 1/2, 3/2, etc.).
This causes the fermions to obey the Pauli exclusion principle , where no two particles may occupy the same quantum state .
Quarks have fractional elementary electric charge (-1/3 or 2/3)  and leptons have whole-numbered electric charge (0 or 1).
Quarks also have color charge , which is labeled arbitrarily with no correlation to actual light color as red, green and blue.
Because the interactions between the quarks stores energy which can convert to other particles when the quarks are far apart enough, quarks cannot be observed independently.
This is called color confinement .
There are three known generations of quarks (up and down, strange and charm , top and bottom ) and leptons (electron and its neutrino, muon and its neutrino , tau and its neutrino ), with strong indirect evidence that the fourth generation of fermions does not exist.
Bosons   Main article: Boson  Bosons are the mediators or carriers of fundamental interactions, such as electromagnetism , the weak interaction , and the strong interaction .
Electromagnetism is mediated by the photon , the quanta of light .
: 29–30 The weak interaction is mediated by the W and Z bosons .
The strong interaction is mediated by the gluon , which can link quarks together to form composite particles.
Due to the aforementioned color confinement, gluons are never observed independently.
The Higgs boson gives mass to the W and Z bosons via the Higgs mechanism  – the gluon and photon are expected to be massless .
All bosons have an integer quantum spin (0 and 1) and can have the same quantum state .
Antiparticles and color charge   Main articles: Antiparticle and Color charge  Most aforementioned particles have corresponding antiparticles , which compose antimatter .
Normal particles have positive lepton or baryon number , and antiparticles have these numbers negative.
Most properties of corresponding antiparticles and particles are the same, with a few gets reversed; the electron's antiparticle, positron, has an opposite charge.
To differentiate between antiparticles and particles, a plus or negative sign is added in superscript .
For example, the electron and the positron are denoted e − and e + .
When a particle and an antiparticle interact with each other, they are annihilated and convert to other particles.
Some particles, such as the photon or gluon, have no antiparticles.
Quarks and gluons additionally have color charges, which influences the strong interaction.
Quark's color charges are called red, green and blue (though the particle itself have no physical color), and in antiquarks are called antired, antigreen and antiblue.
The gluon can have eight color charges , which are the result of quarks' interactions to form composite particles (gauge symmetry SU(3) ).
Composite   Main article: Composite particle  A proton consists of two up quarks and one down quark, linked together by gluons .
The quarks' color charge are also visible.
The neutrons and protons in the atomic nuclei are baryons – the neutron is composed of two down quarks and one up quark, and the proton is composed of two up quarks and one down quark.
A baryon is composed of three quarks, and a meson is composed of two quarks (one normal, one anti).
Baryons and mesons are collectively called hadrons .
Quarks inside hadrons are governed by the strong interaction, thus are subjected to quantum chromodynamics (color charges).
The bounded quarks must have their color charge to be neutral, or "white" for analogy with mixing the primary colors .
More exotic hadrons can have other types, arrangement or number of quarks ( tetraquark , pentaquark ).
A normal atom is made from protons, neutrons and electrons.
By modifying the particles inside a normal atom, exotic atoms can be formed.
A simple example would be the hydrogen-4.1 , which has one of its electrons replaced with a muon.
Hypothetical   The graviton is a hypothetical particle that can mediate the gravitational interaction, but it has not been detected or completely reconciled with current theories.
Experimental laboratories   Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, USA  The world's major particle physics laboratories are:  Brookhaven National Laboratory ( Long Island , United States ).
Its main facility is the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), which collides heavy ions such as gold ions and polarized protons.
It is the world's first heavy ion collider, and the world's only polarized proton collider.
Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics ( Novosibirsk , Russia ).
Its main projects are now the electron-positron colliders  VEPP-2000 ,  operated since 2006, and VEPP-4,  started experiments in 1994.
Earlier facilities include the first electron–electron beam–beam collider VEP-1, which conducted experiments from 1964 to 1968; the electron-positron colliders VEPP-2, operated from 1965 to 1974; and, its successor VEPP-2M,  performed experiments from 1974 to 2000.
CMS detector for LHC CERN (European Organization for Nuclear Research) ( Franco - Swiss border, near Geneva ).
Its main project is now the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which had its first beam circulation on 10 September 2008, and is now the world's most energetic collider of protons.
It also became the most energetic collider of heavy ions after it began colliding lead ions.
Earlier facilities include the Large Electron–Positron Collider (LEP), which was stopped on 2 November 2000 and then dismantled to give way for LHC; and the Super Proton Synchrotron , which is being reused as a pre-accelerator for the LHC and for fixed-target experiments.
DESY (Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron) ( Hamburg , Germany ).
Its main facility was the Hadron Elektron Ring Anlage (HERA), which collided electrons and positrons with protons.
The accelerator complex is now focused on the production of synchrotron radiation with PETRA III , FLASH and the European XFEL .
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) ( Batavia , United States ).
Its main facility until 2011 was the Tevatron , which collided protons and antiprotons and was the highest-energy particle collider on earth until the Large Hadron Collider surpassed it on 29 November 2009.
Institute of High Energy Physics (IHEP) ( Beijing , China ).
IHEP manages a number of China's major particle physics facilities, including the Beijing Electron–Positron Collider II (BEPC II), the Beijing Spectrometer (BES), the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF), the International Cosmic-Ray Observatory at Yangbajing in Tibet, the Daya Bay Reactor Neutrino Experiment , the China Spallation Neutron Source , the Hard X-ray Modulation Telescope (HXMT), and the Accelerator-driven Sub-critical System (ADS) as well as the Jiangmen Underground Neutrino Observatory (JUNO).
KEK ( Tsukuba , Japan ).
It is the home of a number of experiments such as the K2K experiment , a neutrino oscillation experiment and Belle II , an experiment measuring the CP violation of B mesons .
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory ( Menlo Park , United States ).
Its 2-mile-long linear particle accelerator began operating in 1962 and was the basis for numerous electron and positron collision experiments until 2008.
Since then the linear accelerator is being used for the Linac Coherent Light Source  X-ray laser as well as advanced accelerator design research.
SLAC staff continue to participate in developing and building many particle detectors around the world.
Theory   Quantum field theory Feynman diagram  History  Background  Field theory  Electromagnetism  Weak force  Strong force  Quantum mechanics  Special relativity  General relativity  Gauge theory  Yang–Mills theory   Symmetries  Symmetry in quantum mechanics  C-symmetry  P-symmetry  T-symmetry  Lorentz symmetry  Poincaré symmetry  Gauge symmetry  Explicit symmetry breaking  Spontaneous symmetry breaking  Noether charge  Topological charge   Tools  Anomaly  Background field method  BRST quantization  Correlation function  Crossing  Effective action  Effective field theory  Expectation value  Feynman diagram  Lattice field theory  LSZ reduction formula  Partition function  Propagator  Quantization  Regularization  Renormalization  Vacuum state  Wick's theorem   Equations  Dirac equation  Klein–Gordon equation  Proca equations  Wheeler–DeWitt equation  Bargmann–Wigner equations   Standard Model  Quantum electrodynamics  Electroweak interaction  Quantum chromodynamics  Higgs mechanism   Incomplete theories  String theory  Supersymmetry  Technicolor  Theory of everything  Quantum gravity   Scientists  Adler  Anderson  Anselm  Bargmann  Becchi  Belavin  Bell  Berezin  Bethe  Bjorken  Bleuer  Bogoliubov  Brodsky  Brout  Buchholz  Cachazo  Callan  Coleman  Dashen  DeWitt  Dirac  Doplicher  Dyson  Englert  Faddeev  Fadin  Fayet  Fermi  Feynman  Fierz  Fock  Frampton  Fritzsch  Fröhlich  Fredenhagen  Furry  Glashow  Gelfand  Gell-Mann  Goldstone  Gribov  Gross  Gupta  Guralnik  Haag  Heisenberg  Hepp  Higgs  Hagen  't Hooft  Iliopoulos  Ivanenko  Jackiw  Jona-Lasinio  Jordan  Jost  Källén  Kendall  Kinoshita  Klebanov  Kontsevich  Kuraev  Landau  Lee  Lehmann  Leutwyler  Lipatov  Łopuszański  Low  Lüders  Maiani  Majorana  Maldacena  Migdal  Mills  Møller  Naimark  Nambu  Neveu  Nishijima  Oehme  Oppenheimer  Osterwalder  Parisi  Pauli  Peskin  Plefka  Polyakov  Pomeranchuk  Popov  Proca  Rubakov  Ruelle  Salam  Schrader  Schwarz  Schwinger  Segal  Seiberg  Semenoff  Shifman  Shirkov  Skyrme  Sommerfield  Stora  Stueckelberg  Sudarshan  Symanzik  Thirring  Tomonaga  Tyutin  Vainshtein  Veltman  Virasoro  Ward  Weinberg  Weisskopf  Wentzel  Wess  Wetterich  Weyl  Wick  Wightman  Wigner  Wilczek  Wilson  Witten  Yang  Yukawa  Zamolodchikov  Zamolodchikov  Zee  Zimmermann  Zinn-Justin  Zuber  Zumino     v t e  Theoretical particle physics attempts to develop the models, theoretical framework, and mathematical tools to understand current experiments and make predictions for future experiments (see also theoretical physics ).
There are several major interrelated efforts being made in theoretical particle physics today.
One important branch attempts to better understand the Standard Model and its tests.
Theorists make quantitative predictions of observables at collider and astronomical experiments, which along with experimental measurements is used to extract the parameters of the Standard Model with less uncertainty.
This work probes the limits of the Standard Model and therefore expands scientific understanding of nature's building blocks.
Those efforts are made challenging by the difficulty of calculating high precision quantities in quantum chromodynamics .
Some theorists working in this area use the tools of perturbative quantum field theory and effective field theory , referring to themselves as phenomenologists .
Others make use of lattice field theory and call themselves lattice theorists .
Another major effort is in model building where model builders develop ideas for what physics may lie beyond the Standard Model (at higher energies or smaller distances).
This work is often motivated by the hierarchy problem and is constrained by existing experimental data.
It may involve work on supersymmetry , alternatives to the Higgs mechanism , extra spatial dimensions (such as the Randall–Sundrum models ), Preon theory, combinations of these, or other ideas.
A third major effort in theoretical particle physics is string theory .
String theorists attempt to construct a unified description of quantum mechanics and general relativity by building a theory based on small strings, and branes rather than particles.
If the theory is successful, it may be considered a " Theory of Everything ", or "TOE".
There are also other areas of work in theoretical particle physics ranging from particle cosmology to loop quantum gravity .
Practical applications   In principle, all physics (and practical applications developed therefrom) can be derived from the study of fundamental particles.
In practice, even if "particle physics" is taken to mean only "high-energy atom smashers", many technologies have been developed during these pioneering investigations that later find wide uses in society.
Particle accelerators are used to produce medical isotopes for research and treatment (for example, isotopes used in PET imaging ), or used directly in external beam radiotherapy .
The development of superconductors has been pushed forward by their use in particle physics.
The World Wide Web and touchscreen technology were initially developed at CERN .
Additional applications are found in medicine, national security, industry, computing, science, and workforce development, illustrating a long and growing list of beneficial practical applications with contributions from particle physics.
Future   Major efforts to look for physics beyond the Standard Model include the Future Circular Collider proposed for CERN  and the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5) in the US that will update the 2014 P5 study that recommended the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment , among other experiments.
Study with uncontrolled variable of interest  Anthropological survey paper from 1961 by Juhan Aul ( et ) from University of Tartu who measured about 50 000 people  In fields such as epidemiology , social sciences , psychology and statistics , an observational study draws inferences from a sample to a population where the independent variable is not under the control of the researcher because of ethical concerns or logistical constraints.
One common observational study is about the possible effect of a treatment on subjects, where the assignment of subjects into a treated group versus a control group is outside the control of the investigator.
This is in contrast with experiments , such as randomized controlled trials , where each subject is randomly assigned to a treated group or a control group.
Observational studies, for lacking an assignment mechanism, naturally present difficulties for inferential analysis.
Motivation   The independent variable may be beyond the control of the investigator for a variety of reasons:  A randomized experiment would violate ethical standards.
Suppose one wanted to investigate the abortion – breast cancer hypothesis , which postulates a causal link between induced abortion and the incidence of breast cancer.
In a hypothetical controlled experiment, one would start with a large subject pool of pregnant women and divide them randomly into a treatment group (receiving induced abortions) and a control group (not receiving abortions), and then conduct regular cancer screenings for women from both groups.
Needless to say, such an experiment would run counter to common ethical principles.
(It would also suffer from various confounds and sources of bias, e.g.
it would be impossible to conduct it as a blind experiment .)
The published studies investigating the abortion–breast cancer hypothesis generally start with a group of women who already have received abortions.
Membership in this "treated" group is not controlled by the investigator: the group is formed after the "treatment" has been assigned.
The investigator may simply lack the requisite influence.
Suppose a scientist wants to study the public health effects of a community-wide ban on smoking in public indoor areas.
In a controlled experiment, the investigator would randomly pick a set of communities to be in the treatment group.
However, it is typically up to each community and/or its legislature to enact a smoking ban .
The investigator can be expected to lack the political power to cause precisely those communities in the randomly selected treatment group to pass a smoking ban.
In an observational study, the investigator would typically start with a treatment group consisting of those communities where a smoking ban is already in effect.
A randomized experiment may be impractical.
Suppose a researcher wants to study the suspected link between a certain medication and a very rare group of symptoms arising as a side effect.
Setting aside any ethical considerations, a randomized experiment would be impractical because of the rarity of the effect.
There may not be a subject pool large enough for the symptoms to be observed in at least one treated subject.
An observational study would typically start with a group of symptomatic subjects and work backwards to find those who were given the medication and later developed the symptoms.
Thus a subset of the treated group was determined based on the presence of symptoms, instead of by random assignment.
Many randomized controlled trials are not broadly representative of real-world patients and this may limit their external validity .
Patients who are eligible for inclusion in a randomized controlled trial are usually younger, more likely to be male, healthier and more likely to be treated according to recommendations from guidelines.
If and when the intervention is later added to routine-care, a large portion of the patients who will receive it may be old with many concomitant diseases and drug-therapies, although these particular patient groups will not have been studied in the initial experimental trials.
An observational study that examines the real-world patients in everyday routine care can complement the results from the randomized trial in order to be more generally applicable in the patient population.
Types   Case-control study : study originally developed in epidemiology, in which two existing groups differing in outcome are identified and compared on the basis of some supposed causal attribute.
Cross-sectional study : involves data collection from a population, or a representative subset, at one specific point in time.
Longitudinal study :  correlational research study that involves repeated observations of the same variables over long periods of time.
Cohort study and Panel study are particular forms of longitudinal study.
Degree of usefulness and reliability   "Although observational studies cannot be used to make definitive statements of fact about the "safety, efficacy, or effectiveness" of a practice, they can:    provide information on 'real world' use and practice;  detect signals about the benefits and risks of...
use  in the general population;  help formulate hypotheses to be tested in subsequent experiments;  provide part of the community-level data needed to design more informative pragmatic clinical trials; and  inform clinical practice."
Bias and compensating methods   This section needs additional citations for verification .
Find sources:  "Observational study" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  In all of those cases, if a randomized experiment cannot be carried out, the alternative line of investigation suffers from the problem that the decision of which subjects receive the treatment is not entirely random and thus is a potential source of bias .
A major challenge in conducting observational studies is to draw inferences that are acceptably free from influences by overt biases, as well as to assess the influence of potential hidden biases.
The following are a non-exhaustive set of problems especially common in observational studies.
Matching techniques bias   In lieu of experimental control, multivariate statistical techniques allow the approximation of experimental control with statistical control by using matching methods.
Matching methods account for the influences of observed factors that might influence a cause-and-effect relationship.
In healthcare and the social sciences , investigators may use matching to compare units that nonrandomly received the treatment and control.
One common approach is to use propensity score matching in order to reduce confounding ,  although this has recently come under criticism for exacerbating the very problems it seeks to solve.
Multiple comparison bias   Multiple comparison bias can occur when several hypotheses are tested at the same time.
As the number of recorded factors increases, the likelihood increases that at least one of the recorded factors will be highly correlated with the data output simply by chance.
Omitted variable bias   An observer of an uncontrolled experiment (or process) records potential factors and the data output: the goal is to determine the effects of the factors.
Sometimes the recorded factors may not be directly causing the differences in the output.
There may be more important factors which were not recorded but are, in fact, causal.
Also, recorded or unrecorded factors may be correlated which may yield incorrect conclusions.
Selection bias   Another difficulty with observational studies is that researchers may themselves be biased in their observational skills.
This would allow for researchers to (either consciously or unconsciously) seek out the information they're looking for while conducting their research.
For example, researchers may exaggerate the effect of one variable, or downplay the effect of another: researchers may even select in subjects that fit their conclusions.
This selection bias can happen at any stage of the research process.
This introduces bias into the data where certain variables are systematically incorrectly measured.
Quality   A 2014 (updated in 2024) Cochrane review concluded that observational studies produce results similar to those conducted as randomized controlled trials .
The review reported little evidence for significant effect differences between observational studies and randomized controlled trials, regardless of design.
Differences need to be evaluated by looking at population, comparator, heterogeneity, and outcomes.
Branch of cosmology which studies mathematical models of the universe  This article is about the branch of physics and astronomy.
For other uses, see Cosmology .
Artist conception of the Big Bang cosmological model, the most widely accepted out of all in physical cosmology (neither time nor size to scale)  Part of a series on Physical cosmology  Big Bang  ·  Universe  Age of the universe  Chronology of the universe  Early universe  Inflation  ·  Nucleosynthesis  Backgrounds  Gravitational wave (GWB)  Microwave (CMB)  ·  Neutrino (CNB)    Expansion · Future  Hubble's law  ·  Redshift  Expansion of the universe  FLRW metric  ·  Friedmann equations  Inhomogeneous cosmology  Future of an expanding universe  Ultimate fate of the universe   Components · Structure Components  Lambda-CDM model  Dark energy  ·  Dark matter  Structure  Shape of the universe  Galaxy filament  ·  Galaxy formation  Large quasar group  Large-scale structure  Reionization  ·  Structure formation    Experiments  Black Hole Initiative (BHI)  BOOMERanG  Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE)  Dark Energy Survey  Planck space observatory  Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS)  2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey ("2dF")  Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP)   Scientists  Aaronson  Alfvén  Alpher  Copernicus  de Sitter  Dicke  Ehlers  Einstein  Ellis  Friedmann  Galileo  Gamow  Guth  Hawking  Hubble  Huygens  Kepler  Lemaître  Mather  Newton  Penrose  Penzias  Rubin  Schmidt  Smoot  Suntzeff  Sunyaev  Tolman  Wilson  Zeldovich   List of cosmologists   Subject history  Discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation  History of the Big Bang theory  Timeline of cosmological theories    Category   Astronomy portal v t e  Physical cosmology is a branch of cosmology concerned with the study of cosmological models.
A cosmological model , or simply cosmology , provides a description of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and allows study of fundamental questions about its origin , structure, evolution , and ultimate fate .
Cosmology as a science originated with the Copernican principle , which implies that celestial bodies obey identical physical laws to those on Earth, and Newtonian mechanics , which first allowed those physical laws to be understood.
Physical cosmology, as it is now understood, began with the development in 1915 of Albert Einstein 's general theory of relativity , followed by major observational discoveries in the 1920s: first, Edwin Hubble discovered that the universe contains a huge number of external galaxies beyond the Milky Way ; then, work by Vesto Slipher and others showed that the universe is expanding .
These advances made it possible to speculate about the origin of the universe, and allowed the establishment of the Big Bang theory, by Georges Lemaître , as the leading cosmological model.
A few researchers still advocate a handful of alternative cosmologies ;  however, most cosmologists agree that the Big Bang theory best explains the observations.
Dramatic advances in observational cosmology since the 1990s, including the cosmic microwave background , distant supernovae and galaxy redshift surveys , have led to the development of a standard model of cosmology .
This model requires the universe to contain large amounts of dark matter and dark energy whose nature is currently not well understood, but the model gives detailed predictions that are in excellent agreement with many diverse observations.
Cosmology draws heavily on the work of many disparate areas of research in theoretical and applied physics .
Areas relevant to cosmology include particle physics experiments and theory , theoretical and observational astrophysics , general relativity, quantum mechanics , and plasma physics .
Subject history   Nature timeline This box: view talk edit −13 — – −12 — – −11 — – −10 — – −9 — – −8 — – −7 — – −6 — – −5 — – −4 — – −3 — – −2 — – −1 — – 0 — Dark Ages Reionization Matter-dominated era Accelerated expansion Water on Earth Single-celled life Photosynthesis Multicellular life Vertebrates ← Earliest Universe ← Earliest stars ← Earliest galaxy ← Earliest quasar / black hole ← Omega Centauri ← Andromeda Galaxy ← Milky Way spirals ← NGC 188 star cluster ← Alpha Centauri ← Earth / Solar System ← Earliest known life ← Earliest oxygen ← Atmospheric oxygen ← Sexual reproduction ← Earliest fungi ← Earliest animals / plants ← Cambrian explosion ← Earliest mammals ← Earliest apes / humans L i f e ( billion years ago )  See also: Timeline of cosmology and List of cosmologists  Modern cosmology developed along tandem tracks of theory and observation.
In 1916, Albert Einstein published his theory of general relativity , which provided a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time.
At the time, Einstein believed in a static universe , but found that his original formulation of the theory did not permit it.
This is because masses distributed throughout the universe gravitationally attract, and move toward each other over time.
However, he realized that his equations permitted the introduction of a constant term which could counteract the attractive force of gravity on the cosmic scale.
Einstein published his first paper on relativistic cosmology in 1917, in which he added this cosmological constant to his field equations in order to force them to model a static universe.
The Einstein model describes a static universe; space is finite and unbounded (analogous to the surface of a sphere, which has a finite area but no edges).
However, this so-called Einstein model is unstable to small perturbations—it will eventually start to expand or contract.
It was later realized that Einstein's model was just one of a larger set of possibilities, all of which were consistent with general relativity and the cosmological principle .
The cosmological solutions of general relativity were found by Alexander Friedmann in the early 1920s.
His equations describe the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker universe, which may expand or contract, and whose geometry may be open, flat, or closed.
History of the Universe – gravitational waves are hypothesized to arise from cosmic inflation , a rapidly accelerated expansion just after the Big Bang     In the 1910s, Vesto Slipher (and later Carl Wilhelm Wirtz ) interpreted the red shift of spiral nebulae as a Doppler shift that indicated they were receding from Earth.
However, it is difficult to determine the distance to astronomical objects.
One way is to compare the physical size of an object to its angular size , but a physical size must be assumed to do this.
Another method is to measure the brightness of an object and assume an intrinsic luminosity , from which the distance may be determined using the inverse-square law .
Due to the difficulty of using these methods, they did not realize that the nebulae were actually galaxies outside our own Milky Way , nor did they speculate about the cosmological implications.
In 1927, the Belgian  Roman Catholic  priest  Georges Lemaître independently derived the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker equations and proposed, on the basis of the recession of spiral nebulae, that the universe began with the "explosion" of a "primeval atom "  —which was later called the Big Bang.
In 1929, Edwin Hubble provided an observational basis for Lemaître's theory.
Hubble showed that the spiral nebulae were galaxies by determining their distances using measurements of the brightness of Cepheid variable stars.
He discovered a relationship between the redshift of a galaxy and its distance.
He interpreted this as evidence that the galaxies are receding from Earth in every direction at speeds proportional to their distance.
This fact is now known as Hubble's law , though the numerical factor Hubble found relating recessional velocity and distance was off by a factor of ten, due to not knowing about the types of Cepheid variables.
Given the cosmological principle, Hubble's law suggested that the universe was expanding.
Two primary explanations were proposed for the expansion.
One was Lemaître's Big Bang theory, advocated and developed by George Gamow.
The other explanation was Fred Hoyle 's steady state model in which new matter is created as the galaxies move away from each other.
In this model, the universe is roughly the same at any point in time.
For a number of years, support for these theories was evenly divided.
However, the observational evidence began to support the idea that the universe evolved from a hot dense state.
The discovery of the cosmic microwave background in 1965 lent strong support to the Big Bang model,  and since the precise measurements of the cosmic microwave background by the Cosmic Background Explorer in the early 1990s, few cosmologists have seriously proposed other theories of the origin and evolution of the cosmos.
One consequence of this is that in standard general relativity, the universe began with a singularity , as demonstrated by Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking in the 1960s.
An alternative view to extend the Big Bang model, suggesting the universe had no beginning or singularity and the age of the universe is infinite, has been presented.
In September 2023, astrophysicists questioned the overall current view of the universe , in the form of the Standard Model of Cosmology , based on the latest James Webb Space Telescope studies.
Energy of the cosmos   The lightest chemical elements , primarily hydrogen and helium , were created during the Big Bang through the process of nucleosynthesis .
In a sequence of stellar nucleosynthesis reactions, smaller atomic nuclei are then combined into larger atomic nuclei, ultimately forming stable iron group elements such as iron and nickel , which have the highest nuclear binding energies .
The net process results in a later energy release , meaning subsequent to the Big Bang.
Such reactions of nuclear particles can lead to sudden energy releases from cataclysmic variable stars such as novae .
Gravitational collapse of matter into black holes also powers the most energetic processes, generally seen in the nuclear regions of galaxies, forming quasars and active galaxies .
Cosmologists cannot explain all cosmic phenomena exactly, such as those related to the accelerating expansion of the universe , using conventional forms of energy .
Instead, cosmologists propose a new form of energy called dark energy that permeates all space.
One hypothesis is that dark energy is just the vacuum energy , a component of empty space that is associated with the virtual particles that exist due to the uncertainty principle .
There is no clear way to define the total energy in the universe using the most widely accepted theory of gravity, general relativity.
Therefore, it remains controversial whether the total energy is conserved in an expanding universe.
For instance, each photon that travels through intergalactic space loses energy due to the redshift effect.
This energy is not transferred to any other system, so seems to be permanently lost.
On the other hand, some cosmologists insist that energy is conserved in some sense; this follows the law of conservation of energy .
Different forms of energy may dominate the cosmos— relativistic particles which are referred to as radiation , or non-relativistic particles referred to as matter.
Relativistic particles are particles whose rest mass is zero or negligible compared to their kinetic energy , and so move at the speed of light or very close to it; non-relativistic particles have much higher rest mass than their energy and so move much slower than the speed of light.
As the universe expands, both matter and radiation become diluted.
However, the energy densities of radiation and matter dilute at different rates.
As a particular volume expands, mass-energy density is changed only by the increase in volume, but the energy density of radiation is changed both by the increase in volume and by the increase in the wavelength of the photons that make it up.
Thus the energy of radiation becomes a smaller part of the universe's total energy than that of matter as it expands.
The very early universe is said to have been 'radiation dominated' and radiation controlled the deceleration of expansion.
Later, as the average energy per photon becomes roughly 10 eV and lower, matter dictates the rate of deceleration and the universe is said to be 'matter dominated'.
The intermediate case is not treated well analytically .
As the expansion of the universe continues, matter dilutes even further and the cosmological constant becomes dominant, leading to an acceleration in the universe's expansion.
History of the universe   See also: Timeline of the Big Bang  The history of the universe is a central issue in cosmology.
The history of the universe is divided into different periods called epochs, according to the dominant forces and processes in each period.
The standard cosmological model is known as the Lambda-CDM model .
Equations of motion   Main article: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric  Within the standard cosmological model , the equations of motion governing the universe as a whole are derived from general relativity with a small, positive cosmological constant.
The solution is an expanding universe; due to this expansion, the radiation and matter in the universe cool down and become diluted.
At first, the expansion is slowed down by gravitation attracting the radiation and matter in the universe.
However, as these become diluted, the cosmological constant becomes more dominant and the expansion of the universe starts to accelerate rather than decelerate.
In our universe this happened billions of years ago.
Particle physics in cosmology   Main article: Particle physics in cosmology  During the earliest moments of the universe, the average energy density was very high, making knowledge of particle physics critical to understanding this environment.
Hence, scattering processes and decay of unstable elementary particles are important for cosmological models of this period.
As a rule of thumb, a scattering or a decay process is cosmologically important in a certain epoch if the time scale describing that process is smaller than, or comparable to, the time scale of the expansion of the universe.
The time scale that describes the expansion of the universe is     1   /   H    {\displaystyle 1/H}   with     H    {\displaystyle H}   being the Hubble parameter , which varies with time.
The expansion timescale     1   /   H    {\displaystyle 1/H}   is roughly equal to the age of the universe at each point in time.
Timeline of the Big Bang   Main article: Timeline of the Big Bang  Observations suggest that the universe began around 13.8 billion years ago.
Since then, the evolution of the universe has passed through three phases.
The very early universe, which is still poorly understood, was the split second in which the universe was so hot that particles had energies higher than those currently accessible in particle accelerators on Earth.
Therefore, while the basic features of this epoch have been worked out in the Big Bang theory, the details are largely based on educated guesses.
Following this, in the early universe, the evolution of the universe proceeded according to known high energy physics .
This is when the first protons, electrons and neutrons formed, then nuclei and finally atoms.
With the formation of neutral hydrogen, the cosmic microwave background was emitted.
Finally, the epoch of structure formation began, when matter started to aggregate into the first stars and quasars , and ultimately galaxies, clusters of galaxies and superclusters formed.
The future of the universe is not yet firmly known, but according to the ΛCDM model it will continue expanding forever.
Areas of study   Below, some of the most active areas of inquiry in cosmology are described, in roughly chronological order.
This does not include all of the Big Bang cosmology, which is presented in Timeline of the Big Bang .
Very early universe   The early, hot universe appears to be well explained by the Big Bang from roughly 10 −33 seconds onwards, but there are several problems .
One is that there is no compelling reason, using current particle physics, for the universe to be flat , homogeneous, and isotropic  (see the cosmological principle ) .
Moreover, grand unified theories of particle physics suggest that there should be magnetic monopoles in the universe, which have not been found.
These problems are resolved by a brief period of cosmic inflation , which drives the universe to flatness , smooths out anisotropies and inhomogeneities to the observed level, and exponentially dilutes the monopoles.
The physical model behind cosmic inflation is extremely simple, but it has not yet been confirmed by particle physics, and there are difficult problems reconciling inflation and quantum field theory .
Some cosmologists think that string theory and brane cosmology will provide an alternative to inflation.
Another major problem in cosmology is what caused the universe to contain far more matter than antimatter .
Cosmologists can observationally deduce that the universe is not split into regions of matter and antimatter.
If it were, there would be X-rays and gamma rays produced as a result of annihilation , but this is not observed.
Therefore, some process in the early universe must have created a small excess of matter over antimatter, and this (currently not understood) process is called baryogenesis .
Three required conditions for baryogenesis were derived by Andrei Sakharov in 1967, and requires a violation of the particle physics symmetry , called CP-symmetry , between matter and antimatter.
However, particle accelerators measure too small a violation of CP-symmetry to account for the baryon asymmetry.
Cosmologists and particle physicists look for additional violations of the CP-symmetry in the early universe that might account for the baryon asymmetry.
Both the problems of baryogenesis and cosmic inflation are very closely related to particle physics, and their resolution might come from high energy theory and experiment , rather than through observations of the universe.
Big Bang Theory   Main article: Big Bang nucleosynthesis  Big Bang nucleosynthesis is the theory of the formation of the elements in the early universe.
It finished when the universe was about three minutes old and its temperature dropped below that at which nuclear fusion could occur.
Big Bang nucleosynthesis had a brief period during which it could operate, so only the very lightest elements were produced.
Starting from hydrogen ions ( protons ), it principally produced deuterium , helium-4 , and lithium .
Other elements were produced in only trace abundances.
The basic theory of nucleosynthesis was developed in 1948 by George Gamow , Ralph Asher Alpher , and Robert Herman .
It was used for many years as a probe of physics at the time of the Big Bang, as the theory of Big Bang nucleosynthesis connects the abundances of primordial light elements with the features of the early universe.
Specifically, it can be used to test the equivalence principle ,  to probe dark matter , and test neutrino physics.
Some cosmologists have proposed that Big Bang nucleosynthesis suggests there is a fourth "sterile" species of neutrino.
Standard model of Big Bang cosmology   The ΛCDM ( Lambda cold dark matter ) or Lambda-CDM model is a parametrization of the Big Bang cosmological model in which the universe contains a cosmological constant, denoted by Lambda ( Greek  Λ ), associated with dark energy, and cold dark matter (abbreviated CDM ).
It is frequently referred to as the standard model of Big Bang cosmology.
Cosmic microwave background   Main article: Cosmic microwave background  The cosmic microwave background is radiation left over from decoupling after the epoch of recombination when neutral atoms first formed.
At this point, radiation produced in the Big Bang stopped Thomson scattering from charged ions.
The radiation, first observed in 1965 by Arno Penzias and Robert Woodrow Wilson , has a perfect thermal black-body spectrum.
It has a temperature of 2.7 kelvins today and is isotropic to one part in 10 5 .
Cosmological perturbation theory , which describes the evolution of slight inhomogeneities in the early universe, has allowed cosmologists to precisely calculate the angular power spectrum of the radiation, and it has been measured by the recent satellite experiments ( COBE and WMAP )  and many ground and balloon-based experiments (such as Degree Angular Scale Interferometer , Cosmic Background Imager , and Boomerang ).
One of the goals of these efforts is to measure the basic parameters of the Lambda-CDM model with increasing accuracy, as well as to test the predictions of the Big Bang model and look for new physics.
The results of measurements made by WMAP, for example, have placed limits on the neutrino masses.
Newer experiments, such as QUIET and the Atacama Cosmology Telescope , are trying to measure the polarization of the cosmic microwave background.
These measurements are expected to provide further confirmation of the theory as well as information about cosmic inflation, and the so-called secondary anisotropies,  such as the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect and Sachs-Wolfe effect , which are caused by interaction between galaxies and clusters with the cosmic microwave background.
On 17 March 2014, astronomers of the BICEP2 Collaboration announced the apparent detection of B -mode polarization of the CMB, considered to be evidence of primordial gravitational waves that are predicted by the theory of inflation to occur during the earliest phase of the Big Bang.
However, later that year the Planck collaboration provided a more accurate measurement of cosmic dust , concluding that the B-mode signal from dust is the same strength as that reported from BICEP2.
On 30 January 2015, a joint analysis of BICEP2 and Planck data was published and the European Space Agency announced that the signal can be entirely attributed to interstellar dust in the Milky Way.
Formation and evolution of large-scale structure   Main articles: Large-scale structure of the cosmos , Structure formation , and Galaxy formation and evolution  Understanding the formation and evolution of the largest and earliest structures (i.e., quasars, galaxies, clusters and superclusters ) is one of the largest efforts in cosmology.
Cosmologists study a model of hierarchical structure formation in which structures form from the bottom up, with smaller objects forming first, while the largest objects, such as superclusters, are still assembling.
One way to study structure in the universe is to survey the visible galaxies, in order to construct a three-dimensional picture of the galaxies in the universe and measure the matter power spectrum .
This is the approach of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey .
Another tool for understanding structure formation is simulations, which cosmologists use to study the gravitational aggregation of matter in the universe, as it clusters into filaments , superclusters and voids .
Most simulations contain only non-baryonic cold dark matter , which should suffice to understand the universe on the largest scales, as there is much more dark matter in the universe than visible, baryonic matter.
More advanced simulations are starting to include baryons and study the formation of individual galaxies.
Cosmologists study these simulations to see if they agree with the galaxy surveys, and to understand any discrepancy.
Other, complementary observations to measure the distribution of matter in the distant universe and to probe reionization include:  The Lyman-alpha forest , which allows cosmologists to measure the distribution of neutral atomic hydrogen gas in the early universe, by measuring the absorption of light from distant quasars by the gas.
The 21-centimeter  absorption line of neutral atomic hydrogen also provides a sensitive test of cosmology.
Weak lensing , the distortion of a distant image by gravitational lensing due to dark matter.
These will help cosmologists settle the question of when and how structure formed in the universe.
Dark matter   Main article: Dark matter  Evidence from Big Bang nucleosynthesis , the cosmic microwave background , structure formation, and galaxy rotation curves suggests that about 23% of the mass of the universe consists of non-baryonic dark matter, whereas only 4% consists of visible, baryonic matter .
The gravitational effects of dark matter are well understood, as it behaves like a cold, non-radiative fluid that forms haloes around galaxies.
Dark matter has never been detected in the laboratory, and the particle physics nature of dark matter remains completely unknown.
Without observational constraints, there are a number of candidates, such as a stable supersymmetric particle, a weakly interacting massive particle , a gravitationally-interacting massive particle, an axion , and a massive compact halo object .
Alternatives to the dark matter hypothesis include a modification of gravity at small accelerations ( MOND ) or an effect from brane cosmology.
TeVeS is a version of MOND that can explain gravitational lensing.
Dark energy   Main article: Dark energy  If the universe is flat , there must be an additional component making up 73% (in addition to the 23% dark matter and 4% baryons) of the energy density of the universe.
This is called dark energy.
In order not to interfere with Big Bang nucleosynthesis and the cosmic microwave background, it must not cluster in haloes like baryons and dark matter.
There is strong observational evidence for dark energy, as the total energy density of the universe is known through constraints on the flatness of the universe, but the amount of clustering matter is tightly measured, and is much less than this.
The case for dark energy was strengthened in 1999, when measurements demonstrated that the expansion of the universe has begun to gradually accelerate.
Apart from its density and its clustering properties, nothing is known about dark energy.
Quantum field theory predicts a cosmological constant (CC) much like dark energy, but 120 orders of magnitude larger than that observed.
Steven Weinberg and a number of string theorists (see string landscape ) have invoked the 'weak anthropic principle ': i.e.
the reason that physicists observe a universe with such a small cosmological constant is that no physicists (or any life) could exist in a universe with a larger cosmological constant.
Many cosmologists find this an unsatisfying explanation: perhaps because while the weak anthropic principle is self-evident (given that living observers exist, there must be at least one universe with a cosmological constant which allows for life to exist) it does not attempt to explain the context of that universe.
For example, the weak anthropic principle alone does not distinguish between:  Only one universe will ever exist and there is some underlying principle that constrains the CC to the value we observe.
Only one universe will ever exist and although there is no underlying principle fixing the CC, we got lucky.
Lots of universes exist (simultaneously or serially) with a range of CC values, and of course ours is one of the life-supporting ones.
Other possible explanations for dark energy include quintessence  or a modification of gravity on the largest scales.
The effect on cosmology of the dark energy that these models describe is given by the dark energy's equation of state , which varies depending upon the theory.
The nature of dark energy is one of the most challenging problems in cosmology.
A better understanding of dark energy is likely to solve the problem of the ultimate fate of the universe .
In the current cosmological epoch, the accelerated expansion due to dark energy is preventing structures larger than superclusters from forming.
It is not known whether the acceleration will continue indefinitely, perhaps even increasing until a big rip , or whether it will eventually reverse, lead to a Big Freeze , or follow some other scenario.
Gravitational waves   Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of spacetime that propagate as waves at the speed of light, generated in certain gravitational interactions that propagate outward from their source.
Gravitational-wave astronomy is an emerging branch of observational astronomy which aims to use gravitational waves to collect observational data about sources of detectable gravitational waves such as binary star systems composed of white dwarfs , neutron stars , and black holes ; and events such as supernovae , and the formation of the early universe shortly after the Big Bang.
In 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration teams announced that they had made the first observation of gravitational waves , originating from a pair of merging black holes using the Advanced LIGO detectors.
On 15 June 2016, a second detection of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes was announced.
Besides LIGO, many other gravitational-wave observatories (detectors) are under construction.
Other areas of inquiry   Cosmologists also study:  Whether primordial black holes were formed in our universe, and what happened to them.
Detection of cosmic rays with energies above the GZK cutoff ,  and whether it signals a failure of special relativity at high energies.
The equivalence principle ,  whether or not Einstein's general theory of relativity is the correct theory of gravitation ,  and if the fundamental laws of physics are the same everywhere in the universe.
Find sources:  "Scatter plot" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Plot using the dispersal of scattered dots to show the relationship between variables  Not to be confused with Correlogram or Scatter matrix .
Scatter plot One of the Seven Basic Tools of Quality First described by John Herschel  Purpose To identify the type of relationship (if any) between two quantitative variables  Waiting time between eruptions and the duration of the eruption for the Old Faithful Geyser in Yellowstone National Park , Wyoming , USA.
This chart suggests there are generally two types of eruptions: short-wait-short-duration, and long-wait-long-duration.
A 3D scatter plot allows the visualization of multivariate data.
This scatter plot takes multiple scalar variables and uses them for different axes in phase space.
The different variables are combined to form coordinates in the phase space and they are displayed using glyphs and coloured using another scalar variable.
A scatter plot , also called a scatterplot , scatter graph , scatter chart , scattergram , or scatter diagram ,  is a type of plot or mathematical diagram using Cartesian coordinates to display values for typically two variables for a set of data.
If the points are coded (color/shape/size), one additional variable can be displayed.
The data are displayed as a collection of points, each having the value of one variable determining the position on the horizontal axis and the value of the other variable determining the position on the vertical axis .
Overview   A scatter plot can be used either when one continuous variable is under the control of the experimenter and the other depends on it or when both continuous variables are independent.
If a parameter exists that is systematically incremented and/or decremented by the other, it is called the control parameter or independent variable and is customarily plotted along the horizontal axis.
The measured or dependent variable is customarily plotted along the vertical axis.
If no dependent variable exists, either type of variable can be plotted on either axis and a scatter plot will illustrate only the degree of correlation (not causation ) between two variables.
A scatter plot can suggest various kinds of correlations between variables with a certain confidence interval .
For example, weight and height would be on the y -axis, and height would be on the x -axis.
Correlations may be positive (rising), negative (falling), or null (uncorrelated).
If the dots' pattern slopes from lower left to upper right, it indicates a positive correlation between the variables being studied.
If the pattern of dots slopes from upper left to lower right, it indicates a negative correlation.
A line of best fit (alternatively called 'trendline') can be drawn to study the relationship between the variables.
An equation for the correlation between the variables can be determined by established best-fit procedures.
For a linear correlation, the best-fit procedure is known as linear regression and is guaranteed to generate a correct solution in a finite time.
No universal best-fit procedure is guaranteed to generate a correct solution for arbitrary relationships.
A scatter plot is also very useful when we wish to see how two comparable data sets agree to show nonlinear relationships between variables.
The ability to do this can be enhanced by adding a smooth line such as LOESS .
Furthermore, if the data are represented by a mixture model of simple relationships, these relationships will be visually evident as superimposed patterns.
The scatter diagram is one of the seven basic tools of quality control .
Scatter charts can be built in the form of bubble , marker, or/and line charts .
Example   For example, to display a link between a person's lung capacity, and how long that person could hold their breath, a researcher would choose a group of people to study, then measure each one's lung capacity (first variable) and how long that person could hold their breath (second variable).
The researcher would then plot the data in a scatter plot, assigning "lung capacity" to the horizontal axis, and "time holding breath" to the vertical axis.
A person with a lung capacity of 400 cl who held their breath for 21.7 s would be represented by a single dot on the scatter plot at the point (400, 21.7) in the Cartesian coordinates .
The scatter plot of all the people in the study would enable the researcher to obtain a visual comparison of the two variables in the data set and will help to determine what kind of relationship there might be between the two variables.
Scatter plot matrices   For a set of data variables (dimensions) X 1 , X 2 , ...
, X k , the scatter plot matrix shows all the pairwise scatter plots of the variables on a single view with multiple scatterplots in a matrix format.
For k variables, the scatterplot matrix will contain k rows and k columns.
A plot located on the intersection of row and j th column is a plot of variables X i versus X j .
This means that each row and column is one dimension, and each cell plots a scatter plot of two dimensions.
A generalized scatter plot matrix  offers a range of displays of paired combinations of categorical and quantitative variables.
A mosaic plot , fluctuation diagram , or faceted bar chart may be used to display two categorical variables.
Other plots are used for one categorical and one quantitative variables.
Visualization of 3D data along with the correspondent scatterplot matrix  Page notice  You are not logged in.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Method of logical reasoning  "Inductive inference" redirects here.
Belief without doubt in propositions that are in fact true  For statistical certainty, see Probability .
For the film, see Certainty (film) .
"Certain" redirects here.
For other uses, see Certain (disambiguation) .
Find sources:  "Certainty" – news  ·  newspapers  ·  books  ·  scholar  ·  JSTOR  ( March 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Part of a series on Epistemology   Outline  Category  Index   Schools  Coherentism  Contextualism  Dogmatism  Empiricism  Fallibilism  Foundationalism  Infallibilism  Infinitism  Naturalism  Perspectivism  Pragmatism  Rationalism  Relativism  Skepticism  Solipsism   Concepts  Action  Analytic–synthetic distinction  A priori and a posteriori  Belief  Credence  Certainty  Data  Experience  Information  Justification  Induction  Knowledge  Rationality  Reason  Truth  Wisdom   Domains  Applied epistemology  Evolutionary epistemology  Formal epistemology  Historical epistemology  Metaepistemology  Social epistemology  Virtue epistemology   Epistemologists  Aristotle  Sextus Empiricus  Edmund Gettier  Wang Yangming  René Descartes  David Hume  Immanuel Kant  W.
V.
O.
Quine  more...
  Related fields  Epistemic cognition  Epistemic logic  Philosophy of perception  Philosophy of science  v t e  Certainty (also known as epistemic certainty or objective certainty ) is the epistemic property of beliefs which a person has no rational grounds for doubting.
One standard way of defining epistemic certainty is that a belief is certain if and only if the person holding that belief could not be mistaken in holding that belief.
Other common definitions of certainty involve the indubitable nature of such beliefs or define certainty as a property of those beliefs with the greatest possible justification .
Certainty is closely related to knowledge , although contemporary philosophers tend to treat knowledge as having lower requirements than certainty.
Importantly, epistemic certainty is not the same thing as psychological certainty (also known as subjective certainty or certitude ), which describes the highest degree to which a person could be convinced that something is true.
While a person may be completely convinced that a particular belief is true, and might even be psychologically incapable of entertaining its falsity, this does not entail that the belief is itself beyond rational doubt or incapable of being false.
While the word "certainty" is sometimes used to refer to a person's subjective certainty about the truth of a belief, philosophers are primarily interested in the question of whether any beliefs ever attain objective certainty.
The philosophical question of whether one can ever be truly certain about anything has been widely debated for centuries.
Many proponents of philosophical skepticism deny that certainty is possible, or claim that it is only possible in a priori domains such as logic or mathematics.
Historically, many philosophers have held that knowledge requires epistemic certainty, and therefore that one must have infallible justification in order to count as knowing the truth of a proposition.
However, many philosophers such as René Descartes were troubled by the resulting skeptical implications, since all of our experiences at least seem to be compatible with various skeptical scenarios .
It is generally accepted today that most of our beliefs are compatible with their falsity and are therefore fallible , although the status of being certain is still often ascribed to a limited range of beliefs (such as " I exist ").
The apparent fallibility of our beliefs has led many contemporary philosophers to deny that knowledge requires certainty.
Ludwig Wittgenstein – 20th century     If you tried to doubt everything you would not get as far as doubting anything.
The game of doubting itself presupposes certainty.
Ludwig Wittgenstein , On Certainty , #115   On Certainty is a series of notes made by Ludwig Wittgenstein just prior to his death.
The main theme of the work is that context plays a role in epistemology.
Wittgenstein asserts an anti-foundationalist message throughout the work: that every claim can be doubted but certainty is possible in a framework.
"The function  serve in language is to serve as a kind of framework within which empirical propositions can make sense".
Degrees of certainty   See also: Inductive reasoning , Probability interpretations , and Philosophy of statistics  Physicist Lawrence M.
Krauss suggests that the need for identifying degrees of certainty is under-appreciated in various domains, including policy-making and the understanding of science.
This is because different goals require different degrees of certainty – and politicians are not always aware of (or do not make it clear) how much certainty we are working with.
Rudolf Carnap viewed certainty as a matter of degree ("degrees of certainty") which could be objectively measured, with degree one being certainty.
Bayesian analysis derives degrees of certainty which are interpreted as a measure of subjective  psychological  belief .
Alternatively, one might use the legal degrees of certainty .
These standards of evidence ascend as follows: no credible evidence, some credible evidence, a preponderance of evidence, clear and convincing evidence, beyond reasonable doubt, and beyond any shadow of a doubt (i.e.
undoubtable – recognized as an impossible standard to meet – which serves only to terminate the list).
If knowledge requires absolute certainty, then knowledge is most likely impossible , as evidenced by the apparent fallibility of our beliefs.
Foundational crisis of mathematics   Main article: Foundations of mathematics § Foundational crisis  The foundational crisis of mathematics was the early 20th century's term for the search for proper foundations of mathematics.
After several schools of the philosophy of mathematics ran into difficulties one after the other in the 20th century, the assumption that mathematics had any foundation that could be stated within mathematics itself began to be heavily challenged.
One attempt after another to provide unassailable foundations for mathematics was found to suffer from various paradoxes (such as Russell's paradox ) and to be inconsistent .
Various schools of thought were opposing each other.
The leading school was that of the formalist approach, of which David Hilbert was the foremost proponent, culminating in what is known as Hilbert's program , which sought to ground mathematics on a small basis of a formal system proved sound by metamathematical  finitistic means.
The main opponent was the intuitionist school, led by L.E.J.
Brouwer , which resolutely discarded formalism as a meaningless game with symbols.
The fight was acrimonious.
In 1920 Hilbert succeeded in having Brouwer, whom he considered a threat to mathematics, removed from the editorial board of Mathematische Annalen , the leading mathematical journal of the time.
Gödel's incompleteness theorems , proved in 1931, showed that essential aspects of Hilbert's program could not be attained.
In Gödel 's first result he showed how to construct, for any sufficiently powerful and consistent finitely axiomatizable system – such as necessary to axiomatize the elementary theory of arithmetic – a statement that can be shown to be true, but that does not follow from the rules of the system.
It thus became clear that the notion of mathematical truth cannot be reduced to a purely formal system as envisaged in Hilbert's program.
In a next result Gödel showed that such a system was not powerful enough for proving its own consistency, let alone that a simpler system could do the job.
This proves that there is no hope to prove the consistency of any system that contains an axiomatization of elementary arithmetic, and, in particular, to prove the consistency of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC), the system which is generally used for building all mathematics.
However, if ZFC is not consistent, there exists a proof of both a theorem and its negation, and this would imply a proof of all theorems and all their negations.
As, despite the large number of mathematical areas that have been deeply studied, no such contradiction has ever been found, this provides an almost certainty of mathematical results.
Moreover, if such a contradiction would eventually be found, most mathematicians are convinced that it will be possible to resolve it by a slight modification of the axioms of ZFC.
Moreover, the method of forcing allows proving the consistency of a theory, provided that another theory is consistent.
For example, if ZFC is consistent, adding to it the continuum hypothesis or a negation of it defines two theories that are both consistent (in other words, the continuum is independent from the axioms of ZFC).
This existence of proofs of relative consistency implies that the consistency of modern mathematics depends weakly on a particular choice on the axioms on which mathematics are built.
In this sense, the crisis has been resolved, as, although consistency of ZFC is not provable, it solves (or avoids) all logical paradoxes at the origin of the crisis, and there are many facts that provide a quasi-certainty of the consistency of modern mathematics.
Probability based on prior knowledge  "Bayes rule" redirects here.
For the concept in decision theory, see Bayes estimator .
Part of a series on Bayesian statistics  Posterior = Likelihood × Prior ÷ Evidence  Background  Bayesian inference  Bayesian probability  Bayes' theorem  Bernstein–von Mises theorem  Coherence  Cox's theorem  Cromwell's rule  Principle of indifference  Principle of maximum entropy  Model building  Weak prior ...
Strong prior  Conjugate prior  Linear regression  Empirical Bayes  Hierarchical model  Posterior approximation  Markov chain Monte Carlo  Laplace's approximation  Integrated nested Laplace approximations  Variational inference  Approximate Bayesian computation  Estimators  Bayesian estimator  Credible interval  Maximum a posteriori estimation  Evidence approximation  Evidence lower bound  Nested sampling  Model evaluation  Bayes factor  Model averaging  Posterior predictive    Mathematics portal v t e  In probability theory and statistics , Bayes' theorem (alternatively Bayes' law or Bayes' rule ), named after Thomas Bayes , describes the probability of an event , based on prior knowledge of conditions that might be related to the event.
For example, if the risk of developing health problems is known to increase with age, Bayes' theorem allows the risk to an individual of a known age to be assessed more accurately by conditioning it relative to their age, rather than assuming that the individual is typical of the population as a whole.
One of the many applications of Bayes' theorem is Bayesian inference , a particular approach to statistical inference .
When applied, the probabilities involved in the theorem may have different probability interpretations .
With Bayesian probability interpretation, the theorem expresses how a degree of belief, expressed as a probability, should rationally change to account for the availability of related evidence.
Bayesian inference is fundamental to Bayesian statistics .
It has been considered to be "to the theory of probability what Pythagoras's theorem is to geometry ."
Based on Bayes law both the prevalence of a disease in a given population and the error rate of an infectious disease test have to be taken into account to evaluate the meaning of a positive test result correctly and avoid the base-rate fallacy .
History   Bayes' theorem is named after the Reverend Thomas Bayes ( / b eɪ z / ), also a statistician and philosopher.
Bayes used conditional probability to provide an algorithm (his Proposition 9) that uses evidence to calculate limits on an unknown parameter.
His work was published in 1763 as An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances .
Bayes studied how to compute a distribution for the probability parameter of a binomial distribution (in modern terminology).
On Bayes's death his family transferred his papers to a friend, the minister, philosopher, and mathematician Richard Price .
Over two years, Richard Price significantly edited the unpublished manuscript, before sending it to a friend who read it aloud at the Royal Society on 23 December 1763.
Price edited  Bayes's major work "An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances" (1763), which appeared in Philosophical Transactions ,  and contains Bayes' theorem.
Price wrote an introduction to the paper which provides some of the philosophical basis of Bayesian statistics and chose one of the two solutions offered by Bayes.
In 1765, Price was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in recognition of his work on the legacy of Bayes.
On 27 April a letter sent to his friend Benjamin Franklin was read out at the Royal Society, and later published, where Price applies this work to population and computing 'life-annuities'.
Independently of Bayes, Pierre-Simon Laplace in 1774, and later in his 1812 Théorie analytique des probabilités , used conditional probability to formulate the relation of an updated posterior probability from a prior probability, given evidence.
He reproduced and extended Bayes's results in 1774, apparently unaware of Bayes's work.
The Bayesian interpretation of probability was developed mainly by Laplace.
About 200 years later, Sir Harold Jeffreys put Bayes's algorithm and Laplace's formulation on an axiomatic basis, writing in a 1973 book that Bayes' theorem "is to the theory of probability what the Pythagorean theorem is to geometry".
Stephen Stigler used a Bayesian argument to conclude that Bayes' theorem was discovered by Nicholas Saunderson , a blind English mathematician, some time before Bayes;   that interpretation, however, has been disputed.
Martyn Hooper  and Sharon McGrayne  have argued that Richard Price 's contribution was substantial:  By modern standards, we should refer to the Bayes–Price rule.
Price discovered Bayes's work, recognized its importance, corrected it, contributed to the article, and found a use for it.
The modern convention of employing Bayes's name alone is unfair but so entrenched that anything else makes little sense.
Statement of theorem   Bayes' theorem is stated mathematically as the following equation:         P  (  A  |  B  )  =     P  (  B  |  A  )  P  (  A  )    P  (  B  )       {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)={\frac {P(B\vert A)P(A)}{P(B)}}}      where     A    {\displaystyle A}   and     B    {\displaystyle B}   are events and     P  (  B  )  ≠  0    {\displaystyle P(B)\neq 0}   .
P  (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)}   is a conditional probability : the probability of event     A    {\displaystyle A}   occurring given that     B    {\displaystyle B}   is true.
It is also called the posterior probability of     A    {\displaystyle A}   given     B    {\displaystyle B}   .
P  (  B  |  A  )    {\displaystyle P(B\vert A)}   is also a conditional probability: the probability of event     B    {\displaystyle B}   occurring given that     A    {\displaystyle A}   is true.
It can also be interpreted as the likelihood of     A    {\displaystyle A}   given a fixed     B    {\displaystyle B}   because     P  (  B  |  A  )  =  L  (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle P(B\vert A)=L(A\vert B)}   .
P  (  A  )    {\displaystyle P(A)}   and     P  (  B  )    {\displaystyle P(B)}   are the probabilities of observing     A    {\displaystyle A}   and     B    {\displaystyle B}   respectively without any given conditions; they are known as the prior probability and marginal probability .
Proof   Visual proof of Bayes' theorem  For events   Bayes' theorem may be derived from the definition of conditional probability :      P  (  A  |  B  )  =     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    P  (  B  )     ,   if   P  (  B  )  ≠  0  ,    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)={\frac {P(A\cap B)}{P(B)}},{\text{ if }}P(B)\neq 0,}    where     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\cap B)}   is the probability of both A and B being true.
Similarly,      P  (  B  |  A  )  =     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    P  (  A  )     ,   if   P  (  A  )  ≠  0.
{\displaystyle P(B\vert A)={\frac {P(A\cap B)}{P(A)}},{\text{ if }}P(A)\neq 0.}
Solving for     P  (  A  ∩  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\cap B)}   and substituting into the above expression for     P  (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)}   yields Bayes' theorem:      P  (  A  |  B  )  =     P  (  B  |  A  )  P  (  A  )    P  (  B  )     ,   if   P  (  B  )  ≠  0.
{\displaystyle P(A\vert B)={\frac {P(B\vert A)P(A)}{P(B)}},{\text{ if }}P(B)\neq 0.}
For continuous random variables   For two continuous random variables  X and Y , Bayes' theorem may be analogously derived from the definition of conditional density :       f   X  |  Y  =  y    (  x  )  =      f   X  ,  Y    (  x  ,  y  )     f   Y    (  y  )       {\displaystyle f_{X\vert Y=y}(x)={\frac {f_{X,Y}(x,y)}{f_{Y}(y)}}}         f   Y  |  X  =  x    (  y  )  =      f   X  ,  Y    (  x  ,  y  )     f   X    (  x  )       {\displaystyle f_{Y\vert X=x}(y)={\frac {f_{X,Y}(x,y)}{f_{X}(x)}}}    Therefore,       f   X  |  Y  =  y    (  x  )  =      f   Y  |  X  =  x    (  y  )   f   X    (  x  )     f   Y    (  y  )     .
{\displaystyle f_{X\vert Y=y}(x)={\frac {f_{Y\vert X=x}(y)f_{X}(x)}{f_{Y}(y)}}.}
General case   Let      P   Y    x      {\displaystyle P_{Y}^{x}}   be the conditional distribution of     Y    {\displaystyle Y}   given     X  =  x    {\displaystyle X=x}   and let      P   X      {\displaystyle P_{X}}   be the distribution of     X    {\displaystyle X}   .
The conditional distribution      P   X    y      {\displaystyle P_{X}^{y}}   of     X    {\displaystyle X}   given     Y  =  y    {\displaystyle Y=y}   is then determined by      P   X    y    (  A  )  =  E  (   1   A    (  X  )   |   Y  =  y  )    {\displaystyle P_{X}^{y}(A)=E(1_{A}(X)|Y=y)}    Existence and uniqueness of the needed conditional expectation is a consequence of the Radon–Nikodym theorem .
Examples   Recreational mathematics   Bayes' rule and computing conditional probabilities provide a solution method for a number of popular puzzles, such as the Three Prisoners problem , the Monty Hall problem , the Two Child problem and the Two Envelopes problem .
Drug testing   Suppose, a particular test for whether someone has been using cannabis is 90% sensitive , meaning the true positive rate (TPR) = 0.90.
Therefore, it leads to 90% true positive results (correct identification of drug use) for cannabis users.
The test is also 80% specific , meaning true negative rate (TNR) = 0.80.
Therefore, the test correctly identifies 80% of non-use for non-users, but also generates 20% false positives, or false positive rate (FPR) = 0.20, for non-users.
Assuming 0.05 prevalence , meaning 5% of people use cannabis, what is the probability that a random person who tests positive is really a cannabis user?
The Positive predictive value (PPV) of a test is the proportion of persons who are actually positive out of all those testing positive, and can be calculated from a sample as:  PPV = True positive / Tested positive  If sensitivity, specificity, and prevalence are known, PPV can be calculated using Bayes theorem.
Let     P  (   User   |   Positive   )    {\displaystyle P({\text{User}}\vert {\text{Positive}})}   mean "the probability that someone is a cannabis user given that they test positive," which is what is meant by PPV.
We can write:          P  (   User   |   Positive   )     =     P  (   Positive   |   User   )  P  (   User   )    P  (   Positive   )           =     P  (   Positive   |   User   )  P  (   User   )    P  (   Positive   |   User   )  P  (   User   )  +  P  (   Positive   |   Non-user   )  P  (   Non-user   )           =     0.90  ×  0.05    0.90  ×  0.05  +  0.20  ×  0.95     =    0.045   0.045  +  0.19     ≈  19  %        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P({\text{User}}\vert {\text{Positive}})&={\frac {P({\text{Positive}}\vert {\text{User}})P({\text{User}})}{P({\text{Positive}})}}\\&={\frac {P({\text{Positive}}\vert {\text{User}})P({\text{User}})}{P({\text{Positive}}\vert {\text{User}})P({\text{User}})+P({\text{Positive}}\vert {\text{Non-user}})P({\text{Non-user}})}}\\&={\frac {0.90\times 0.05}{0.90\times 0.05+0.20\times 0.95}}={\frac {0.045}{0.045+0.19}}\approx 19\%\end{aligned}}}    The fact that     P  (   Positive   )  =  P  (   Positive   |   User   )  P  (   User   )  +  P  (   Positive   |   Non-user   )  P  (   Non-user   )    {\displaystyle P({\text{Positive}})=P({\text{Positive}}\vert {\text{User}})P({\text{User}})+P({\text{Positive}}\vert {\text{Non-user}})P({\text{Non-user}})}   is a direct application of the Law of Total Probability .
In this case, it says that the probability that someone tests positive is the probability that a user tests positive, times the probability of being a user, plus the probability that a non-user tests positive, times the probability of being a non-user.
This is true because the classifications user and non-user form a partition of a set , namely the set of people who take the drug test.
This combined with the definition of conditional probability results in the above statement.
In other words, even if someone tests positive, the probability that they are a cannabis user is only 19%—this is because in this group, only 5% of people are users, and most positives are false positives coming from the remaining 95%.
Using a frequency box to show     P  (   User   |   Positive   )    {\displaystyle P({\text{User}}\vert {\text{Positive}})}   visually by comparison of shaded areas.
Note how small the pink area of true positives is compared to the blue area of false positives.
If 1,000 people were tested:  950 are non-users and 190 of them give false positive (0.20 × 950)  50 of them are users and 45 of them give true positive (0.90 × 50)  The 1,000 people thus yields 235 positive tests, of which only 45 are genuine drug users, about 19%.
Sensitivity or specificity   The importance of specificity can be seen by showing that even if sensitivity is raised to 100% and specificity remains at 80%, the probability of someone testing positive really being a cannabis user only rises from 19% to 21%, but if the sensitivity is held at 90% and the specificity is increased to 95%, the probability rises to 49%.
Test Actual   Positive  Negative    Total   User  45   5  50   Non-user  190  760  950      Total  235   765  1000   90% sensitive, 80% specific, PPV=45/235 ≈ 19%   Test Actual   Positive  Negative    Total   User  50   0  50   Non-user  190  760  950      Total  240   760  1000   100% sensitive, 80% specific, PPV=50/240 ≈ 21%   Test Actual   Positive  Negative    Total   User  45   5  50   Non-user  47  903  950      Total  92   908  1000   90% sensitive, 95% specific, PPV=45/92 ≈ 49%  Cancer rate   Even if 100% of patients with pancreatic cancer have a certain symptom, when someone has the same symptom, it does not mean that this person has a 100% chance of getting pancreatic cancer.
Assuming the incidence rate of pancreatic cancer is 1/100000, while 10/99999 healthy individuals have the same symptoms worldwide, the probability of having pancreatic cancer given the symptoms is only 9.1%, and the other 90.9% could be "false positives" (that is, falsely said to have cancer; "positive" is a confusing term when, as here, the test gives bad news).
Based on incidence rate, the following table presents the corresponding numbers per 100,000 people.
Symptom Cancer   Yes  No    Total   Yes  1  0  1   No  10  99989  99999      Total  11  99989  100000  Which can then be used to calculate the probability of having cancer when you have the symptoms:          P  (   Cancer    |    Symptoms   )     =     P  (   Symptoms    |    Cancer   )  P  (   Cancer   )    P  (   Symptoms   )           =     P  (   Symptoms    |    Cancer   )  P  (   Cancer   )    P  (   Symptoms    |    Cancer   )  P  (   Cancer   )  +  P  (   Symptoms    |    Non-Cancer   )  P  (   Non-Cancer   )           =     1  ×  0.00001    1  ×  0.00001  +  (  10   /   99999  )  ×  0.99999     =    1  11    ≈  9.1  %        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P({\text{Cancer}}|{\text{Symptoms}})&={\frac {P({\text{Symptoms}}|{\text{Cancer}})P({\text{Cancer}})}{P({\text{Symptoms}})}}\\&={\frac {P({\text{Symptoms}}|{\text{Cancer}})P({\text{Cancer}})}{P({\text{Symptoms}}|{\text{Cancer}})P({\text{Cancer}})+P({\text{Symptoms}}|{\text{Non-Cancer}})P({\text{Non-Cancer}})}}\\&={\frac {1\times 0.00001}{1\times 0.00001+(10/99999)\times 0.99999}}={\frac {1}{11}}\approx 9.1\%\end{aligned}}}    Defective item rate    Condition Machine   Defective  Flawless    Total   A  10  190  200   B  9  291  300   C  5   495  500      Total  24   976  1000  A factory produces items using three machines—A, B, and C—which account for 20%, 30%, and 50% of its output respectively.
Of the items produced by machine A, 5% are defective; similarly, 3% of machine B's items and 1% of machine C's are defective.
If a randomly selected item is defective, what is the probability it was produced by machine C?
Once again, the answer can be reached without using the formula by applying the conditions to a hypothetical number of cases.
For example, if the factory produces 1,000 items, 200 will be produced by Machine A, 300 by Machine B, and 500 by Machine C.
Machine A will produce 5% × 200 = 10 defective items, Machine B 3% × 300 = 9, and Machine C 1% × 500 = 5, for a total of 24.
Thus, the likelihood that a randomly selected defective item was produced by machine C is 5/24 (~20.83%).
This problem can also be solved using Bayes' theorem: Let X i denote the event that a randomly chosen item was made by the i  th machine (for i = A,B,C).
Let Y denote the event that a randomly chosen item is defective.
Then, we are given the following information:      P  (   X   A    )  =  0.2  ,   P  (   X   B    )  =  0.3  ,   P  (   X   C    )  =  0.5.
{\displaystyle P(X_{A})=0.2,\quad P(X_{B})=0.3,\quad P(X_{C})=0.5.}
If the item was made by the first machine, then the probability that it is defective is 0.05; that is, P ( Y | X A ) = 0.05.
Overall, we have      P  (  Y   |    X   A    )  =  0.05  ,   P  (  Y   |    X   B    )  =  0.03  ,   P  (  Y   |    X   C    )  =  0.01.
{\displaystyle P(Y|X_{A})=0.05,\quad P(Y|X_{B})=0.03,\quad P(Y|X_{C})=0.01.}
To answer the original question, we first find P (Y).
That can be done in the following way:      P  (  Y  )  =   ∑   i    P  (  Y   |    X   i    )  P  (   X   i    )  =  (  0.05  )  (  0.2  )  +  (  0.03  )  (  0.3  )  +  (  0.01  )  (  0.5  )  =  0.024.
{\displaystyle P(Y)=\sum _{i}P(Y|X_{i})P(X_{i})=(0.05)(0.2)+(0.03)(0.3)+(0.01)(0.5)=0.024.}
Hence, 2.4% of the total output is defective.
We are given that Y has occurred, and we want to calculate the conditional
probability of X C .
By Bayes' theorem,      P  (   X   C     |   Y  )  =     P  (  Y   |    X   C    )  P  (   X   C    )    P  (  Y  )     =     0.01  ⋅  0.50   0.024    =    5  24      {\displaystyle P(X_{C}|Y)={\frac {P(Y|X_{C})P(X_{C})}{P(Y)}}={\frac {0.01\cdot 0.50}{0.024}}={\frac {5}{24}}}    Given that the item is defective, the probability that it was made by machine C is 5/24.
Although machine C produces half of the total output, it produces a much smaller fraction of the defective items.
Hence the knowledge that the item selected was defective enables us to replace the prior probability P ( X C ) = 1/2 by the smaller posterior probability P (X C | Y ) = 5/24.
Interpretations   A geometric visualisation of Bayes' theorem using astronauts who may be suspicious (with eyebrows) and may be assassins (carrying daggers)  The interpretation of Bayes' rule depends on the interpretation of probability ascribed to the terms.
The two predominant interpretations are described below.
Bayesian interpretation   In the Bayesian (or epistemological) interpretation , probability measures a "degree of belief".
Bayes' theorem links the degree of belief in a proposition before and after accounting for evidence.
For example, suppose it is believed with 50% certainty that a coin is twice as likely to land heads than tails.
If the coin is flipped a number of times and the outcomes observed, that degree of belief will probably rise or fall, but might even remain the same, depending on the results.
For proposition A and evidence B ,  P ( A ), the prior , is the initial degree of belief in A .
P ( A | B ), the posterior , is the degree of belief after incorporating news that B is true.
the quotient P ( B | A ) / P ( B ) represents the support B provides for A .
For more on the application of Bayes' theorem under the Bayesian interpretation of probability, see Bayesian inference .
Frequentist interpretation   Illustration of frequentist interpretation with tree diagrams  In the frequentist interpretation , probability measures a "proportion of outcomes".
For example, suppose an experiment is performed many times.
P ( A ) is the proportion of outcomes with property A (the prior)  and P ( B ) is the proportion with property B .
P ( B | A ) is the proportion of outcomes with property B  out of outcomes with property A , and P ( A | B ) is the proportion of those with A  out of those with B (the posterior).
The role of Bayes' theorem is best visualized with tree diagrams.
The two diagrams partition the same outcomes by A and B in opposite orders, to obtain the inverse probabilities.
Bayes' theorem links the different partitionings.
Example   Tree diagram illustrating the beetle example.
R, C, P and       P  ¯      {\displaystyle {\overline {P}}}   are the events rare, common, pattern and no pattern.
Percentages in parentheses are calculated.
Three independent values are given, so it is possible to calculate the inverse tree.
An entomologist spots what might, due to the pattern on its back, be a rare subspecies of beetle .
A full 98% of the members of the rare subspecies have the pattern, so P (Pattern | Rare) = 98%.
Only 5% of members of the common subspecies have the pattern.
The rare subspecies is 0.1% of the total population.
How likely is the beetle having the pattern to be rare: what is P (Rare | Pattern)?
From the extended form of Bayes' theorem (since any beetle is either rare or common),          P  (   Rare   |   Pattern   )     =     P  (   Pattern   |   Rare   )  P  (   Rare   )    P  (   Pattern   )           =     P  (   Pattern   |   Rare   )  P  (   Rare   )    P  (   Pattern   |   Rare   )  P  (   Rare   )  +  P  (   Pattern   |   Common   )  P  (   Common   )           =     0.98  ×  0.001    0.98  ×  0.001  +  0.05  ×  0.999           ≈  1.9  %        {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}P({\text{Rare}}\vert {\text{Pattern}})&={\frac {P({\text{Pattern}}\vert {\text{Rare}})P({\text{Rare}})}{P({\text{Pattern}})}}\\&={\frac {P({\text{Pattern}}\vert {\text{Rare}})P({\text{Rare}})}{P({\text{Pattern}}\vert {\text{Rare}})P({\text{Rare}})+P({\text{Pattern}}\vert {\text{Common}})P({\text{Common}})}}\\&={\frac {0.98\times 0.001}{0.98\times 0.001+0.05\times 0.999}}\\&\approx 1.9\%\end{aligned}}}    Forms   Events   Simple form   For events A and B , provided that P ( B ) ≠ 0,      P  (  A   |   B  )  =     P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )    P  (  B  )     .
{\displaystyle P(A|B)={\frac {P(B|A)P(A)}{P(B)}}.}
In many applications, for instance in Bayesian inference , the event B is fixed in the discussion, and we wish to consider the impact of its having been observed on our belief in various possible events A .
In such a situation the denominator of the last expression, the probability of the given evidence B , is fixed; what we want to vary is A .
Bayes' theorem then shows that the posterior probabilities are proportional to the numerator, so the last equation becomes:      P  (  A   |   B  )  ∝  P  (  A  )  ⋅  P  (  B   |   A  )  .
{\displaystyle P(A|B)\propto P(A)\cdot P(B|A).}
In words, the posterior is proportional to the prior times the likelihood.
If events A 1 , A 2 , ..., are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, i.e., one of them is certain to occur but no two can occur together,  we can determine the proportionality constant by using the fact that their probabilities must add up to one.
For instance, for a given event A , the event A itself and its complement ¬ A are exclusive and exhaustive.
Denoting the constant of proportionality by c we have      P  (  A   |   B  )  =  c  ⋅  P  (  A  )  ⋅  P  (  B   |   A  )   and   P  (  ¬  A   |   B  )  =  c  ⋅  P  (  ¬  A  )  ⋅  P  (  B   |   ¬  A  )  .
{\displaystyle P(A|B)=c\cdot P(A)\cdot P(B|A){\text{ and }}P(\neg A|B)=c\cdot P(\neg A)\cdot P(B|\neg A).}
Adding these two formulas we deduce that      1  =  c  ⋅  (  P  (  B   |   A  )  ⋅  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B   |   ¬  A  )  ⋅  P  (  ¬  A  )  )  ,    {\displaystyle 1=c\cdot (P(B|A)\cdot P(A)+P(B|\neg A)\cdot P(\neg A)),}    or      c  =    1   P  (  B   |   A  )  ⋅  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B   |   ¬  A  )  ⋅  P  (  ¬  A  )     =    1   P  (  B  )     .
{\displaystyle c={\frac {1}{P(B|A)\cdot P(A)+P(B|\neg A)\cdot P(\neg A)}}={\frac {1}{P(B)}}.}
Alternative form   Contingency table   Background Proposition  B  ¬B (not B)   Total   A  P(B|A)·P(A) = P(A|B)·P(B)  P(¬B|A)·P(A) = P(A|¬B)·P(¬B)  P(A)    ¬A (not A)  P(B|¬A)·P(¬A) = P(¬A|B)·P(B)  P(¬B|¬A)·P(¬A) = P(¬A|¬B)·P(¬B)  P(¬A) = 1−P(A)       Total  P(B)  P(¬B) = 1−P(B)  1  Another form of Bayes' theorem for two competing statements or hypotheses is:      P  (  A   |   B  )  =     P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )    P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B   |   ¬  A  )  P  (  ¬  A  )     .
{\displaystyle P(A|B)={\frac {P(B|A)P(A)}{P(B|A)P(A)+P(B|\neg A)P(\neg A)}}.}
For an epistemological interpretation: For proposition A and evidence or background B ,        P  (  A  )    {\displaystyle P(A)}   is the prior probability , the initial degree of belief in A .
P  (  ¬  A  )    {\displaystyle P(\neg A)}   is the corresponding initial degree of belief in not-A , that A is false,  where     P  (  ¬  A  )  =  1  −  P  (  A  )    {\displaystyle P(\neg A)=1-P(A)}        P  (  B   |   A  )    {\displaystyle P(B|A)}   is the conditional probability or likelihood,  the degree of belief in B given that proposition A is true.
P  (  B   |   ¬  A  )    {\displaystyle P(B|\neg A)}   is the conditional probability or likelihood, the degree of belief in B given that proposition A is false.
P  (  A   |   B  )    {\displaystyle P(A|B)}   is the posterior probability , the probability of A after taking into account B .
Extended form   Often, for some partition { A j } of the sample space , the event space is given in terms of P ( A j ) and P ( B | A j ).
It is then useful to compute P ( B ) using the law of total probability :     P  (  B  )  =   ∑   j    P  (  B  ∩   A   j    )  ,    {\displaystyle P(B)=\sum _{j}P(B\cap A_{j}),}    Or (using the multiplication rule for conditional probability),        P  (  B  )  =    ∑   j    P  (  B   |    A   j    )  P  (   A   j    )   ,    {\displaystyle P(B)={\sum _{j}P(B|A_{j})P(A_{j})},}        ⇒  P  (   A   i     |   B  )  =     P  (  B   |    A   i    )  P  (   A   i    )     ∑   j    P  (  B   |    A   j    )  P  (   A   j    )     ⋅    {\displaystyle \Rightarrow P(A_{i}|B)={\frac {P(B|A_{i})P(A_{i})}{\sum \limits _{j}P(B|A_{j})P(A_{j})}}\cdot }    In the special case where A is a binary variable :      P  (  A   |   B  )  =     P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )    P  (  B   |   A  )  P  (  A  )  +  P  (  B   |   ¬  A  )  P  (  ¬  A  )     ⋅    {\displaystyle P(A|B)={\frac {P(B|A)P(A)}{P(B|A)P(A)+P(B|\neg A)P(\neg A)}}\cdot }    Random variables   Bayes' theorem applied to an event space generated by continuous random variables X and Y with known probability distributions.
There exists an instance of Bayes' theorem for each point in the domain .
In practice, these instances might be parametrized by writing the specified probability densities as a function of x and y .
Consider a sample space Ω generated by two random variables  X and Y with known probability distributions.
In principle, Bayes' theorem applies to the events A = { X = x } and B = { Y = y }.
P  (  X   =   x   |   Y   =   y  )  =     P  (  Y   =   y   |   X   =   x  )  P  (  X   =   x  )    P  (  Y   =   y  )       {\displaystyle P(X{=}x|Y{=}y)={\frac {P(Y{=}y|X{=}x)P(X{=}x)}{P(Y{=}y)}}}    However, terms become 0 at points where either variable has finite probability density .
To remain useful, Bayes' theorem can be formulated in terms of the relevant densities (see Derivation ).
Simple form   If X is continuous and Y is discrete,       f   X   |   Y   =   y    (  x  )  =     P  (  Y   =   y   |   X   =   x  )   f   X    (  x  )    P  (  Y   =   y  )       {\displaystyle f_{X|Y{=}y}(x)={\frac {P(Y{=}y|X{=}x)f_{X}(x)}{P(Y{=}y)}}}    where each     f    {\displaystyle f}   is a density function.
If X is discrete and Y is continuous,      P  (  X   =   x   |   Y   =   y  )  =      f   Y   |   X   =   x    (  y  )  P  (  X   =   x  )     f   Y    (  y  )     .
{\displaystyle P(X{=}x|Y{=}y)={\frac {f_{Y|X{=}x}(y)P(X{=}x)}{f_{Y}(y)}}.}
If both X and Y are continuous,       f   X   |   Y   =   y    (  x  )  =      f   Y   |   X   =   x    (  y  )   f   X    (  x  )     f   Y    (  y  )     .
{\displaystyle f_{X|Y{=}y}(x)={\frac {f_{Y|X{=}x}(y)f_{X}(x)}{f_{Y}(y)}}.}
Extended form   A way to conceptualize event spaces generated by continuous random variables X and Y  A continuous event space is often conceptualized in terms of the numerator terms.
It is then useful to eliminate the denominator using the law of total probability .
For f Y ( y ), this becomes an integral:       f   Y    (  y  )  =   ∫   −  ∞    ∞     f   Y   |   X  =  ξ    (  y  )   f   X    (  ξ  )   d  ξ  .
{\displaystyle f_{Y}(y)=\int _{-\infty }^{\infty }f_{Y|X=\xi }(y)f_{X}(\xi )\,d\xi .}
Bayes' rule in odds form   Bayes' theorem in odds form is:      O  (   A   1    :   A   2    |  B  )  =  O  (   A   1    :   A   2    )  ⋅  Λ  (   A   1    :   A   2    |  B  )    {\displaystyle O(A_{1}:A_{2}\vert B)=O(A_{1}:A_{2})\cdot \Lambda (A_{1}:A_{2}\vert B)}    where      Λ  (   A   1    :   A   2    |  B  )  =     P  (  B  |   A   1    )    P  (  B  |   A   2    )       {\displaystyle \Lambda (A_{1}:A_{2}\vert B)={\frac {P(B\vert A_{1})}{P(B\vert A_{2})}}}    is called the Bayes factor or likelihood ratio .
The odds between two events is simply the ratio of the probabilities of the two events.
Thus      O  (   A   1    :   A   2    )  =     P  (   A   1    )    P  (   A   2    )     ,    {\displaystyle O(A_{1}:A_{2})={\frac {P(A_{1})}{P(A_{2})}},}        O  (   A   1    :   A   2    |  B  )  =     P  (   A   1    |  B  )    P  (   A   2    |  B  )     ,    {\displaystyle O(A_{1}:A_{2}\vert B)={\frac {P(A_{1}\vert B)}{P(A_{2}\vert B)}},}    Thus,  the rule says that the posterior odds are the prior odds times the Bayes factor , or in other words,  the posterior is proportional to the prior times the likelihood.
In the special case that      A   1    =  A    {\displaystyle A_{1}=A}   and      A   2    =  ¬  A    {\displaystyle A_{2}=\neg A}   , one writes     O  (  A  )  =  O  (  A  :  ¬  A  )  =  P  (  A  )   /   (  1  −  P  (  A  )  )    {\displaystyle O(A)=O(A:\neg A)=P(A)/(1-P(A))}   , and uses a similar abbreviation for the Bayes factor and for the conditional odds.
The odds on     A    {\displaystyle A}   is by definition the odds for and against     A    {\displaystyle A}   .
Bayes' rule can then be written in the abbreviated form      O  (  A  |  B  )  =  O  (  A  )  ⋅  Λ  (  A  |  B  )  ,    {\displaystyle O(A\vert B)=O(A)\cdot \Lambda (A\vert B),}    or, in words, the posterior odds on     A    {\displaystyle A}   equals the prior odds on     A    {\displaystyle A}   times the likelihood ratio for     A    {\displaystyle A}   given information     B    {\displaystyle B}   .
In short, posterior odds equals prior odds times likelihood ratio .
For example, if a medical test has a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 91%, then the positive Bayes factor is      Λ   +    =  P  (   True Positive   )   /   P  (   False Positive   )  =  90  %   /   (  100  %  −  91  %  )  =  10    {\displaystyle \Lambda _{+}=P({\text{True Positive}})/P({\text{False Positive}})=90\%/(100\%-91\%)=10}   .
Now, if the prevalence of this disease is 9.09%, and if we take that as the prior probability, then the prior odds is about 1:10.
So after receiving a positive test result, the posterior odds of actually having the disease becomes 1:1, which means that the posterior probability of having the disease is 50%.
If a second test is performed in serial testing, and that also turns out to be positive, then the posterior odds of actually having the disease becomes 10:1, which means a posterior probability of about 90.91%.
The negative Bayes factor can be calculated to be 91%/(100%-90%)=9.1, so if the second test turns out to be negative, then the posterior odds of actually having the disease is 1:9.1, which means a posterior probability of about 9.9%.
The example above can also be understood with more solid numbers: Assume the patient taking the test is from a group of 1000 people, where 91 of them actually have the disease (prevalence of 9.1%).
If all these 1000 people take the medical test, 82 of those with the disease will get a true positive result (sensitivity of 90.1%), 9 of those with the disease will get a false negative result ( false negative rate of 9.9%), 827 of those without the disease will get a true negative result (specificity of 91.0%), and 82 of those without the disease will get a false positive result (false positive rate of 9.0%).
Before taking any test, the patient's odds for having the disease is 91:909.
After receiving a positive result, the patient's odds for having the disease is        91  909    ×     90.1  %    9.0  %     =     91  ×  90.1  %    909  ×  9.0  %     =  1  :  1    {\displaystyle {\frac {91}{909}}\times {\frac {90.1\%}{9.0\%}}={\frac {91\times 90.1\%}{909\times 9.0\%}}=1:1}    which is consistent with the fact that there are 82 true positives and 82 false positives in the group of 1000 people.
Correspondence to other mathematical frameworks   Propositional logic   Using     P  (  ¬  B  |  A  )  =  1  −  P  (  B  |  A  )    {\displaystyle P(\neg B\vert A)=1-P(B\vert A)}   twice, one may use Bayes' theorem to also express     P  (  ¬  B  |  ¬  A  )    {\displaystyle P(\neg B\vert \neg A)}   in terms of     P  (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)}   and without negations:      P  (  ¬  B  |  ¬  A  )  =  1  −   (   1  −  P  (  A  |  B  )   )      P  (  B  )    P  (  ¬  A  )     ,    {\displaystyle P(\neg B\vert \neg A)=1-\left(1-P(A\vert B)\right){\frac {P(B)}{P(\neg A)}},}    when     P  (  ¬  A  )  =  1  −  P  (  A  )  ≠  0    {\displaystyle P(\neg A)=1-P(A)\neq 0}   .
From this we can read off the inference      P  (  A  |  B  )  =  1   ⟹   P  (  ¬  B  |  ¬  A  )  =  1    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)=1\implies P(\neg B\vert \neg A)=1}   .
In words: If certainly     B    {\displaystyle B}   implies     A    {\displaystyle A}   , we infer that certainly     ¬  A    {\displaystyle \neg A}   implies     ¬  B    {\displaystyle \neg B}   .
Where     P  (  B  )  ≠  0    {\displaystyle P(B)\neq 0}   , the two implications being certain are equivalent statements.
In the probability formulas, the conditional probability      P  (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)}   generalizes the logical implication     B   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle B\implies A}   , where now beyond assigning true or false, we assign probability values to statements.
The assertion of     B   ⟹   A    {\displaystyle B\implies A}   is captured by certainty of the conditional, the assertion of     P  (  A  |  B  )  =  1    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)=1}   .
Relating the directions of implication, Bayes' theorem represents a generalization of the contraposition law, which in classical propositional logic can be expressed as:      (  B   ⟹   A  )   ⟺   (  ¬  A   ⟹   ¬  B  )    {\displaystyle (B\implies A)\iff (\neg A\implies \neg B)}   .
In this relation between implications, the positions of     A    {\displaystyle A}   resp.
B    {\displaystyle B}   get flipped.
The corresponding formula in terms of probability calculus is Bayes' theorem, which in its expanded form involving the prior probability / base rate      a    {\displaystyle a}   of only     A    {\displaystyle A}   , is expressed as:        P  (  A  |  B  )  =  P  (  B  |  A  )     a  (  A  )    P  (  B  |  A  )   a  (  A  )  +  P  (  B  |  ¬  A  )   a  (  ¬  A  )     .
{\displaystyle P(A\vert B)=P(B\vert A){\frac {a(A)}{P(B\vert A)\,a(A)+P(B\vert \neg A)\,a(\neg A)}}.}
Subjective logic   Bayes' theorem represents a special case of deriving inverted conditional opinions in subjective logic expressed as:      (   ω   A      |   ~     B    S    ,   ω   A      |   ~     ¬  B    S    )  =  (   ω   B  |  A    S    ,   ω   B  |  ¬  A    S    )     ϕ  ~      a   A    ,    {\displaystyle (\omega _{A{\tilde {|}}B}^{S},\omega _{A{\tilde {|}}\lnot B}^{S})=(\omega _{B\vert A}^{S},\omega _{B\vert \lnot A}^{S}){\widetilde {\phi }}a_{A},}    where        ϕ  ~       {\displaystyle {\widetilde {\phi }}}   denotes the operator for inverting conditional opinions.
The argument     (   ω   B  |  A    S    ,   ω   B  |  ¬  A    S    )    {\displaystyle (\omega _{B\vert A}^{S},\omega _{B\vert \lnot A}^{S})}   denotes a pair of binomial conditional opinions given by source     S    {\displaystyle S}   , and the argument      a   A      {\displaystyle a_{A}}   denotes the prior probability (aka.
the base rate ) of     A    {\displaystyle A}   .
The pair of derivative inverted conditional opinions is denoted     (   ω   A      |   ~     B    S    ,   ω   A      |   ~     ¬  B    S    )    {\displaystyle (\omega _{A{\tilde {|}}B}^{S},\omega _{A{\tilde {|}}\lnot B}^{S})}   .
The conditional opinion      ω   A  |  B    S      {\displaystyle \omega _{A\vert B}^{S}}   generalizes the probabilistic conditional     P  (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B)}   , i.e.
in addition to assigning a probability the source     S    {\displaystyle S}   can assign any subjective opinion to the conditional statement     (  A  |  B  )    {\displaystyle (A\vert B)}   .
A binomial subjective opinion      ω   A    S      {\displaystyle \omega _{A}^{S}}   is the belief in the truth of statement     A    {\displaystyle A}   with degrees of epistemic uncertainty, as expressed by source     S    {\displaystyle S}   .
Every subjective opinion has a corresponding projected probability     P  (   ω   A    S    )    {\displaystyle P(\omega _{A}^{S})}   .
The application of Bayes' theorem to projected probabilities of opinions is a homomorphism , meaning that Bayes' theorem can be expressed in terms of projected probabilities of opinions:      P  (   ω   A      |   ~     B    S    )  =     P  (   ω   B  |  A    S    )  a  (  A  )    P  (   ω   B  |  A    S    )  a  (  A  )  +  P  (   ω   B  |  ¬  A    S    )  a  (  ¬  A  )     .
{\displaystyle P(\omega _{A{\tilde {|}}B}^{S})={\frac {P(\omega _{B\vert A}^{S})a(A)}{P(\omega _{B\vert A}^{S})a(A)+P(\omega _{B\vert \lnot A}^{S})a(\lnot A)}}.}
Hence, the subjective Bayes' theorem represents a generalization of Bayes' theorem.
Generalizations   Bayes theorem for 3 events   A version of Bayes' theorem for 3 events  results from the addition of a third event     C    {\displaystyle C}   , with     P  (  C  )  >  0  ,    {\displaystyle P(C)>0,}   on which all probabilities are conditioned:      P  (  A  |  B  ∩  C  )  =     P  (  B  |  A  ∩  C  )   P  (  A  |  C  )    P  (  B  |  C  )       {\displaystyle P(A\vert B\cap C)={\frac {P(B\vert A\cap C)\,P(A\vert C)}{P(B\vert C)}}}    Derivation   Using the chain rule       P  (  A  ∩  B  ∩  C  )  =  P  (  A  |  B  ∩  C  )   P  (  B  |  C  )   P  (  C  )    {\displaystyle P(A\cap B\cap C)=P(A\vert B\cap C)\,P(B\vert C)\,P(C)}    And, on the other hand      P  (  A  ∩  B  ∩  C  )  =  P  (  B  ∩  A  ∩  C  )  =  P  (  B  |  A  ∩  C  )   P  (  A  |  C  )   P  (  C  )    {\displaystyle P(A\cap B\cap C)=P(B\cap A\cap C)=P(B\vert A\cap C)\,P(A\vert C)\,P(C)}    The desired result is obtained by identifying both expressions and solving for     P  (  A  |  B  ∩  C  )    {\displaystyle P(A\vert B\cap C)}   .
Use in genetics   In genetics, Bayes' rule can be used to estimate the probability of an individual having a specific genotype.
Many people seek to approximate their chances of being affected by a genetic disease or their likelihood of being a carrier for a recessive gene of interest.
A Bayesian analysis can be done based on family history or genetic testing , in order to predict whether an individual will develop a disease or pass one on to their children.
Genetic testing and prediction is a common practice among couples who plan to have children but are concerned that they may both be carriers for a disease, especially within communities with low genetic variance.
The first step in Bayesian analysis for genetics is to propose mutually exclusive hypotheses: for a specific allele, an individual either is or is not a carrier.
Next, four probabilities are calculated: Prior Probability (the likelihood of each hypothesis considering information such as family history or predictions based on Mendelian Inheritance), Conditional Probability (of a certain outcome), Joint Probability (product of the first two), and Posterior Probability (a weighted product calculated by dividing the Joint Probability for each hypothesis by the sum of both joint probabilities).
This type of analysis can be done based purely on family history of a condition or in concert with genetic testing.
Using pedigree to calculate probabilities    Hypothesis  Hypothesis 1: Patient is a carrier  Hypothesis 2: Patient is not a carrier   Prior Probability  1/2  1/2   Conditional Probability that all four offspring will be unaffected  (1/2) · (1/2) · (1/2) · (1/2) = 1/16  About 1   Joint Probability  (1/2) · (1/16) = 1/32  (1/2) · 1 = 1/2   Posterior Probability  (1/32) / (1/32 + 1/2) = 1/17  (1/2) / (1/32 + 1/2) = 16/17  Example of a Bayesian analysis table for a female individual's risk for a disease based on the knowledge that the disease is present in her siblings but not in her parents or any of her four children.
Based solely on the status of the subject's siblings and parents, she is equally likely to be a carrier as to be a non-carrier (this likelihood is denoted by the Prior Hypothesis).
However, the probability that the subject's four sons would all be unaffected is 1/16 ( 1 ⁄ 2 · 1 ⁄ 2 · 1 ⁄ 2 · 1 ⁄ 2 ) if she is a carrier, about 1 if she is a non-carrier (this is the Conditional Probability).
The Joint Probability reconciles these two predictions by multiplying them together.
The last line (the Posterior Probability) is calculated by dividing the Joint Probability for each hypothesis by the sum of both joint probabilities.
Using genetic test results   Parental genetic testing can detect around 90% of known disease alleles in parents that can lead to carrier or affected status in their child.
Cystic fibrosis is a heritable disease caused by an autosomal recessive mutation on the CFTR gene,  located on the q arm of chromosome 7.
Bayesian analysis of a female patient with a family history of cystic fibrosis (CF), who has tested negative for CF, demonstrating how this method was used to determine her risk of having a child born with CF: Because the patient is unaffected, she is either homozygous for the wild-type allele, or heterozygous.
To establish prior probabilities, a Punnett square is used, based on the knowledge that neither parent was affected by the disease but both could have been carriers:   Mother Father   W Homozygous for the wild- type allele (a non-carrier)   M Heterozygous (a CF carrier)    W Homozygous for the wild- type allele (a non-carrier)   WW  MW   M Heterozygous (a CF carrier)   MW  MM (affected by cystic fibrosis)   Given that the patient is unaffected, there are only three possibilities.
Within these three, there are two scenarios in which the patient carries the mutant allele.
Thus the prior probabilities are 2 ⁄ 3 and 1 ⁄ 3 .
Next, the patient undergoes genetic testing and tests negative for cystic fibrosis.
This test has a 90% detection rate, so the conditional probabilities of a negative test are 1/10 and 1.
Finally, the joint and posterior probabilities are calculated as before.
Hypothesis  Hypothesis 1: Patient is a carrier  Hypothesis 2: Patient is not a carrier   Prior Probability  2/3  1/3   Conditional Probability of a negative test  1/10  1   Joint Probability  1/15  1/3   Posterior Probability  1/6  5/6  After carrying out the same analysis on the patient's male partner (with a negative test result), the chances of their child being affected is equal to the product of the parents' respective posterior probabilities for being carriers times the chances that two carriers will produce an affected offspring ( 1 ⁄ 4 ).
Genetic testing done in parallel with other risk factor identification   Bayesian analysis can be done using phenotypic information associated with a genetic condition, and when combined with genetic testing this analysis becomes much more complicated.
Cystic fibrosis, for example, can be identified in a fetus through an ultrasound looking for an echogenic bowel, meaning one that appears brighter than normal on a scan.
This is not a foolproof test, as an echogenic bowel can be present in a perfectly healthy fetus.
Parental genetic testing is very influential in this case, where a phenotypic facet can be overly influential in probability calculation.
In the case of a fetus with an echogenic bowel, with a mother who has been tested and is known to be a CF carrier, the posterior probability that the fetus actually has the disease is very high (0.64).
However, once the father has tested negative for CF, the posterior probability drops significantly (to 0.16).
Risk factor calculation is a powerful tool in genetic counseling and reproductive planning, but it cannot be treated as the only important factor to consider.
As above, incomplete testing can yield falsely high probability of carrier status, and testing can be financially inaccessible or unfeasible when a parent is not present.
For broader coverage of this topic, see Bayesian statistics .
Part of a series on Bayesian statistics  Posterior = Likelihood × Prior ÷ Evidence  Background  Bayesian inference  Bayesian probability  Bayes' theorem  Bernstein–von Mises theorem  Coherence  Cox's theorem  Cromwell's rule  Principle of indifference  Principle of maximum entropy  Model building  Weak prior ...
Strong prior  Conjugate prior  Linear regression  Empirical Bayes  Hierarchical model  Posterior approximation  Markov chain Monte Carlo  Laplace's approximation  Integrated nested Laplace approximations  Variational inference  Approximate Bayesian computation  Estimators  Bayesian estimator  Credible interval  Maximum a posteriori estimation  Evidence approximation  Evidence lower bound  Nested sampling  Model evaluation  Bayes factor  Model averaging  Posterior predictive    Mathematics portal v t e Interpretation of probability Bayesian probability ( / ˈ b eɪ z i ən /  BAY -zee-ən or / ˈ b eɪ ʒ ən /  BAY -zhən )  is an interpretation of the concept of probability , in which, instead of frequency or propensity of some phenomenon, probability is interpreted as reasonable expectation  representing a state of knowledge  or as quantification of a personal belief.
The Bayesian interpretation of probability can be seen as an extension of propositional logic that enables reasoning with hypotheses ;   that is, with propositions whose truth or falsity is unknown.
In the Bayesian view, a probability is assigned to a hypothesis, whereas under frequentist inference , a hypothesis is typically tested without being assigned a probability.
Bayesian probability belongs to the category of evidential probabilities; to evaluate the probability of a hypothesis, the Bayesian probabilist specifies a prior probability .
This, in turn, is then updated to a posterior probability in the light of new, relevant data (evidence).
The Bayesian interpretation provides a standard set of procedures and formulae to perform this calculation.
The term Bayesian derives from the 18th-century mathematician and theologian Thomas Bayes , who provided the first mathematical treatment of a non-trivial problem of statistical data analysis using what is now known as Bayesian inference .
: 131 Mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace pioneered and popularized what is now called Bayesian probability.
: 97–98    Bayesian methodology   Bayesian methods are characterized by concepts and procedures as follows:  The use of random variables , or more generally unknown quantities,  to model all sources of uncertainty in statistical models including uncertainty resulting from lack of information (see also aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty ).
The need to determine the prior probability distribution taking into account the available (prior) information.
The sequential use of Bayes' theorem : as more data become available, calculate the posterior distribution using Bayes' theorem; subsequently, the posterior distribution becomes the next prior.
While for the frequentist, a hypothesis is a proposition (which must be either true or false ) so that the frequentist probability of a hypothesis is either 0 or 1, in Bayesian statistics, the probability that can be assigned to a hypothesis can also be in a range from 0 to 1 if the truth value is uncertain.
Objective and subjective Bayesian probabilities   Broadly speaking, there are two interpretations of Bayesian probability.
For objectivists, who interpret probability as an extension of logic , probability quantifies the reasonable expectation that everyone (even a "robot") who shares the same knowledge should share in accordance with the rules of Bayesian statistics, which can be justified by Cox's theorem .
For subjectivists, probability corresponds to a personal belief.
Rationality and coherence allow for substantial variation within the constraints they pose; the constraints are justified by the Dutch book argument or by decision theory and de Finetti's theorem .
The objective and subjective variants of Bayesian probability differ mainly in their interpretation and construction of the prior probability.
History   Main article: History of statistics § Bayesian statistics  The term Bayesian derives from Thomas Bayes (1702–1761), who proved a special case of what is now called Bayes' theorem in a paper titled " An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances ".
In that special case, the prior and posterior distributions were beta distributions and the data came from Bernoulli trials .
It was Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827) who introduced a general version of the theorem and used it to approach problems in celestial mechanics , medical statistics, reliability , and jurisprudence .
Early Bayesian inference, which used uniform priors following Laplace's principle of insufficient reason , was called " inverse probability " (because it infers backwards from observations to parameters, or from effects to causes).
After the 1920s, "inverse probability" was largely supplanted by a collection of methods that came to be called frequentist statistics .
In the 20th century, the ideas of Laplace developed in two directions, giving rise to objective and subjective currents in Bayesian practice.
Harold Jeffreys ' Theory of Probability (first published in 1939) played an important role in the revival of the Bayesian view of probability, followed by works by Abraham Wald (1950) and Leonard J.
Savage (1954).
The adjective Bayesian itself dates to the 1950s;  the derived Bayesianism , neo-Bayesianism is of 1960s coinage.
In the objectivist stream, the statistical analysis depends on only the model assumed and the data analysed.
No subjective decisions need to be involved.
In contrast, "subjectivist" statisticians deny the possibility of fully objective analysis for the general case.
In the 1980s, there was a dramatic growth in research and applications of Bayesian methods, mostly attributed to the discovery of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods and the consequent removal of many of the computational problems, and to an increasing interest in nonstandard, complex applications.
While frequentist statistics remains strong (as demonstrated by the fact that much of undergraduate teaching is based on it  ), Bayesian methods are widely accepted and used, e.g., in the field of machine learning .
Justification   The use of Bayesian probabilities as the basis of Bayesian inference has been supported by several arguments, such as Cox axioms , the Dutch book argument , arguments based on decision theory and de Finetti's theorem .
Axiomatic approach   Richard T.
Cox showed that Bayesian updating follows from several axioms, including two functional equations and a hypothesis of differentiability.
The assumption of differentiability or even continuity is controversial; Halpern found a counterexample based on his observation that the Boolean algebra of statements may be finite.
Other axiomatizations have been suggested by various authors with the purpose of making the theory more rigorous.
Dutch book approach   Main article: Dutch book  Bruno de Finetti proposed the Dutch book argument based on betting.
A clever bookmaker makes a Dutch book by setting the odds and bets to ensure that the bookmaker profits—at the expense of the gamblers—regardless of the outcome of the event (a horse race, for example) on which the gamblers bet.
It is associated with probabilities implied by the odds not being coherent .
However, Ian Hacking noted that traditional Dutch book arguments did not specify Bayesian updating: they left open the possibility that non-Bayesian updating rules could avoid Dutch books.
For example, Hacking writes   "And neither the Dutch book argument, nor any other in the personalist arsenal of proofs of the probability axioms, entails the dynamic assumption.
In fact, there are non-Bayesian updating rules that also avoid Dutch books (as discussed in the literature on " probability kinematics "  following the publication of Richard C.
Jeffrey 's rule, which is itself regarded as Bayesian  ).
The additional hypotheses sufficient to (uniquely) specify Bayesian updating are substantial  and not universally seen as satisfactory.
Decision theory approach   A decision-theoretic justification of the use of Bayesian inference (and hence of Bayesian probabilities) was given by Abraham Wald , who proved that every admissible statistical procedure is either a Bayesian procedure or a limit of Bayesian procedures.
Conversely, every Bayesian procedure is admissible .
Personal probabilities and objective methods for constructing priors   Following the work on expected utility  theory of Ramsey and von Neumann ,  decision-theorists have accounted for rational behavior using a probability distribution for the agent .
Johann Pfanzagl completed the Theory of Games and Economic Behavior by providing an axiomatization of subjective probability and utility, a task left uncompleted by von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern : their original theory supposed that all the agents had the same probability distribution, as a convenience.
Pfanzagl's axiomatization was endorsed by Oskar Morgenstern: "Von Neumann and I have anticipated ...
 might, perhaps more typically, be subjective and have stated specifically that in the latter case axioms could be found from which could derive the desired numerical utility together with a number for the probabilities (cf.
p.
19 of The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior).
We did not carry this out; it was demonstrated by Pfanzagl ...
with all the necessary rigor".
Ramsey and Savage noted that the individual agent's probability distribution could be objectively studied in experiments.
Procedures for testing hypotheses about probabilities (using finite samples) are due to Ramsey (1931) and de Finetti (1931, 1937, 1964, 1970).
Both Bruno de Finetti   and Frank P.
Ramsey   acknowledge their debts to pragmatic philosophy , particularly (for Ramsey) to Charles S.
Peirce .
The "Ramsey test" for evaluating probability distributions is implementable in theory, and has kept experimental psychologists occupied for a half century.
This work demonstrates that Bayesian-probability propositions can be falsified , and so meet an empirical criterion of Charles S.
Peirce , whose work inspired Ramsey.
(This falsifiability -criterion was popularized by Karl Popper .
  )
Modern work on the experimental evaluation of personal probabilities uses the randomization, blinding , and Boolean-decision procedures of the Peirce-Jastrow experiment.
Since individuals act according to different probability judgments, these agents' probabilities are "personal" (but amenable to objective study).
Personal probabilities are problematic for science and for some applications where decision-makers lack the knowledge or time to specify an informed probability-distribution (on which they are prepared to act).
To meet the needs of science and of human limitations, Bayesian statisticians have developed "objective" methods for specifying prior probabilities.
Indeed, some Bayesians have argued the prior state of knowledge defines the (unique) prior probability-distribution for "regular" statistical problems; cf.
well-posed problems .
Finding the right method for constructing such "objective" priors (for appropriate classes of regular problems) has been the quest of statistical theorists from Laplace to John Maynard Keynes , Harold Jeffreys , and Edwin Thompson Jaynes .
These theorists and their successors have suggested several methods for constructing "objective" priors (Unfortunately, it is not always clear how to assess the relative "objectivity" of the priors proposed under these methods):  Maximum entropy  Transformation group analysis  Reference analysis  Each of these methods contributes useful priors for "regular" one-parameter problems, and each prior can handle some challenging statistical models (with "irregularity" or several parameters).
Each of these methods has been useful in Bayesian practice.
Indeed, methods for constructing "objective" (alternatively, "default" or "ignorance") priors have been developed by avowed subjective (or "personal") Bayesians like James Berger ( Duke University ) and José-Miguel Bernardo ( Universitat de València ), simply because such priors are needed for Bayesian practice, particularly in science.
The quest for "the universal method for constructing priors" continues to attract statistical theorists.
Thus, the Bayesian statistician needs either to use informed priors (using relevant expertise or previous data) or to choose among the competing methods for constructing "objective" priors.
Material supporting an assertion  For other uses, see Evidence (disambiguation) .
These contrails at an airshow provide evidence regarding the aircraft's flight path as well as the weather conditions.
Evidence for a proposition is what supports the proposition.
It is usually understood as an indication that the supported proposition is true .
What role evidence plays and how it is conceived varies from field to field.
In epistemology , evidence is what justifies  beliefs or what makes it rational to hold a certain doxastic attitude.
For example, a perceptual experience of a tree may act as evidence that justifies the belief that there is a tree.
In this role, evidence is usually understood as a private mental state.
Important topics in this field include the questions of what the nature of these mental states is, for example, whether they have to be propositional, and whether misleading mental states can still qualify as evidence.
In phenomenology , evidence is understood in a similar sense.
Here, however, it is limited to intuitive knowledge that provides immediate access to truth and is therefore indubitable.
In this role, it is supposed to provide ultimate justifications for basic philosophical principles and thus turn philosophy into a rigorous science.
However, it is highly controversial whether evidence can meet these requirements.
In philosophy of science , evidence is understood as that which confirms or disconfirms  scientific hypotheses .
Measurements of Mercury's "anomalous" orbit , for example, are seen as evidence that confirms Einstein 's theory of general relativity .
In order to play the role of neutral arbiter between competing theories, it is important that scientific evidence is public and uncontroversial , like observable physical objects or events, so that the proponents of the different theories can agree on what the evidence is.
This is ensured by following the scientific method and tends to lead to an emerging scientific consensus through the gradual accumulation of evidence.
Two issues for the scientific conception of evidence are the problem of underdetermination , i.e.
that the available evidence may support competing theories equally well, and theory-ladenness , i.e.
that what some scientists consider the evidence to be may already involve various theoretical assumptions not shared by other scientists.
It is often held that there are two kinds of evidence: intellectual evidence or what is self-evident and empirical evidence or evidence accessible through the senses.
Other fields, including the sciences and the law , tend to emphasize more the public nature of evidence (for example, scientists tend to focus on how the data used during statistical inference are generated).
In order for something to act as evidence for a hypothesis, it has to stand in the right relation to it.
In philosophy , this is referred to as the "evidential relation" and there are competing theories about what this relation has to be like.
Probabilistic approaches hold that something counts as evidence if it increases the probability of the supported hypothesis.
According to hypothetico-deductivism , evidence consists in observational consequences of the hypothesis.
The positive-instance approach states that an observation sentence is evidence for a universal hypothesis if the sentence describes a positive instance of this hypothesis.
The evidential relation can occur in various degrees of strength.
These degrees range from direct proof of the truth of a hypothesis to weak evidence that is merely consistent with the hypothesis but does not rule out other, competing hypotheses, as in circumstantial evidence .
In law , rules of evidence govern the types of evidence that are admissible in a legal proceeding.
Types of legal evidence include testimony , documentary evidence , and physical evidence .
The parts of a legal case that are not in controversy are known, in general, as the "facts of the case."
Beyond any facts that are undisputed, a judge or jury is usually tasked with being a trier of fact for the other issues of a case.
Evidence and rules are used to decide questions of fact that are disputed, some of which may be determined by the legal burden of proof relevant to the case.
Evidence in certain cases (e.g.
capital crimes ) must be more compelling than in other situations (e.g.
minor civil disputes), which drastically affects the quality and quantity of evidence necessary to decide a case.
Nature of evidence   Notion   Understood in its broadest sense, evidence for a proposition is what supports this proposition.
Traditionally, the term is sometimes understood in a narrower sense: as the intuitive knowledge of facts that are considered indubitable.
In this sense, only the singular form is used.
This meaning is found especially in phenomenology, in which evidence is elevated to one of the basic principles of philosophy, giving philosophy the ultimate justifications that are supposed to turn it into a rigorous science.
In a more modern usage, the plural form is also used.
In academic discourse, evidence plays a central role in epistemology and in the philosophy of science .
Reference to evidence is made in many different fields, like in science, in the legal system, in history, in journalism and in everyday discourse.
A variety of different attempts have been made to conceptualize the nature of evidence.
These attempts often proceed by starting with intuitions from one field or in relation to one theoretical role played by evidence and go on to generalize these intuitions, leading to a universal definition of evidence.
One important intuition is that evidence is what justifies  beliefs .
This line of thought is usually followed in epistemology and tends to explain evidence in terms of private mental states, for example, as experiences, other beliefs or knowledge.
This is closely related to the idea that how rational someone is, is determined by how they respond to evidence.
Another intuition, which is more dominant in the philosophy of science, focuses on evidence as that which confirms scientific hypotheses and arbitrates between competing theories.
On this view, it is essential that evidence is public so that different scientists can share the same evidence.
This leaves publicly observable phenomena like physical objects and events as the best candidates for evidence, unlike private mental states.
One problem with these approaches is that the resulting definitions of evidence, both within a field and between fields, vary a lot and are incompatible with each other.
For example, it is not clear what a bloody knife and a perceptual experience have in common when both are treated as evidence in different disciplines.
This suggests that there is no unitary concept corresponding to the different theoretical roles ascribed to evidence, i.e.
that we do not always mean the same thing when we talk of evidence.
Characteristics   On the other hand, Aristotle, phenomenologists, and numerous scholars accept that there could be several degrees of evidence.
For instance, while the outcome of a complex equation may become more or less evident to a mathematician after hours of deduction, yet with little doubts about it, a simpler formula would appear more evident to them.
Riofrio has detected some characteristics that are present in evident arguments and proofs.
The more they are evident, the more these characteristics will be present.
There are six intrinsic characteristics of evidence:    The truth lies in what is evident, while falsehood or irrationality, although it may appear evident at times, lacks true evidence.
What is evident aligns coherently with other truths acquired through knowledge.
Any insurmountable incoherence would indicate the presence of error or falsehood.
Evident truths are based on necessary reasoning.
The simplest truths are the most evident.
They are self-explanatory and do not require argumentation to be understood by the intellect.
However, for those lacking education, certain complex truths require rational discourse to become evident.
Evident truths do not need justification; they are indubitable.
They are intuitively grasped by the intellect, without the need for further discourse, arguments, or proof.
Evident truths are clear, translucent, and filled with light.
In addition, four subjective or external characteristics can be detected over those things that are more or less evident:  The evident instills certainty and grants the knower a subjective sense of security, as they believe to have aligned with the truth  Initially, evident truths are perceived as natural and effortless, as Aristotle highlighted.
They are innately present within the intellect, fostering a peaceful and harmonious understanding.
Consequently, evident truths appear to be widely shared, strongly connected to common sense, which comprises generally accepted beliefs.
Evident truths are fertile ground: they provide a solid foundation for other branches of scientific knowledge to flourish.
These ten characteristics of what is evident allowed Riofrio to formulate a test of evidence to detect the level of certainty or evidence that one argument or proof could have.
Different approaches to evidence   Important theorists of evidence include Bertrand Russell , Willard Van Orman Quine , the logical positivists , Timothy Williamson , Earl Conee and Richard Feldman.
Russell, Quine and the logical positivists belong to the empiricist tradition and hold that evidence consists in sense data, stimulation of one's sensory receptors and observation statements, respectively.
According to Williamson, all and only knowledge constitute evidence.
Conee and Feldman hold that only one's current mental states should be considered evidence.
In epistemology   The guiding intuition within epistemology concerning the role of evidence is that it is what justifies beliefs .
For example, Phoebe's auditory experience of the music justifies her belief that the speakers are on.
Evidence has to be possessed by the believer in order to play this role.
So Phoebe's own experiences can justify her own beliefs but not someone else's beliefs.
Some philosophers hold that evidence possession is restricted to conscious mental states, for example, to sense data.
This view has the implausible consequence that many of simple everyday-beliefs would be unjustified.
The more common view is that all kinds of mental states, including stored beliefs that are currently unconscious, can act as evidence.
It is sometimes argued that the possession of a mental state capable of justifying another is not sufficient for the justification to happen.
The idea behind this line of thought is that justified belief has to be connected to or grounded in the mental state acting as its evidence.
So Phoebe's belief that the speakers are on is not justified by her auditory experience if the belief is not based in this experience.
This would be the case, for example, if Phoebe has both the experience and the belief but is unaware of the fact that the music is produced by the speakers.
It is sometimes held that only propositional mental states can play this role, a position known as "propositionalism".
A mental state is propositional if it is an attitude directed at a propositional content.
Such attitudes are usually expressed by verbs like "believe" together with a that-clause, as in "Robert believes that the corner shop sells milk".
Such a view denies that sensory impressions can act as evidence.
This is often held as an argument against this view since sensory impressions are commonly treated as evidence.
Propositionalism is sometimes combined with the view that only attitudes to true propositions can count as evidence.
On this view, the belief that the corner shop sells milk only constitutes evidence for the belief that the corner shop sells dairy products if the corner shop actually sells milk.
Against this position, it has been argued that evidence can be misleading but still count as evidence.
This line of thought is often combined with the idea that evidence, propositional or otherwise, determines what it is rational for us to believe.
But it can be rational to have a false belief.
This is the case when we possess misleading evidence.
For example, it was rational for Neo in the Matrix movie to believe that he was living in the 20th century because of all the evidence supporting his belief despite the fact that this evidence was misleading since it was part of a simulated reality.
This account of evidence and rationality can also be extended to other doxastic attitudes, like disbelief and suspension of belief.
So rationality does not just demand that we believe something if we have decisive evidence for it, it also demands that we disbelieve something if we have decisive evidence against it and that we suspend belief if we lack decisive evidence either way.
In phenomenology   The meaning of the term "evidence" in phenomenology shows many parallels to its epistemological usage, but it is understood in a narrower sense.
Thus, evidence here specifically refers to intuitive knowledge, which is described as "self-given" ( selbst-gegeben ).
This contrasts with empty intentions, in which one refers to states of affairs through a certain opinion, but without an intuitive presentation.
This is why evidence is often associated with the controversial thesis that it constitutes an immediate access to truth.
In this sense, the evidently given phenomenon guarantees its own truth and is therefore considered indubitable.
Due to this special epistemological status of evidence, it is regarded in phenomenology as the basic principle of all philosophy.
In this form, it represents the lowest foundation of knowledge, which consists of indubitable insights upon which all subsequent knowledge is built.
This evidence-based method is meant to make it possible for philosophy to overcome many of the traditionally unresolved disagreements and thus become a rigorous science.
This far-reaching claim of phenomenology, based on absolute certainty, is one of the focal points of criticism by its opponents.
Thus, it has been argued that even knowledge based on self-evident intuition is fallible.
This can be seen, for example, in the fact that even among phenomenologists, there is much disagreement about the basic structures of experience.
In philosophy of science   In the sciences, evidence is understood as what confirms or disconfirms  scientific hypotheses .
The term "confirmation" is sometimes used synonymously with that of "evidential support".
Measurements of Mercury's "anomalous" orbit, for example, are seen as evidence that confirms Einstein's theory of general relativity.
This is especially relevant for choosing between competing theories.
So in the case above, evidence plays the role of neutral arbiter between Newton's and Einstein's theory of gravitation.
This is only possible if scientific evidence is public and uncontroversial so that proponents of competing scientific theories agree on what evidence is available.
These requirements suggest scientific evidence consists not of private mental states but of public physical objects or events .
It is often held that evidence is in some sense prior to the hypotheses it confirms.
This was sometimes understood as temporal priority , i.e.
that we come first to possess the evidence and later form the hypothesis through induction.
But this temporal order is not always reflected in scientific practice, where experimental researchers may look for a specific piece of evidence in order to confirm or disconfirm a pre-existing hypothesis.
Logical positivists , on the other hand, held that this priority is semantic in nature, i.e.
that the meanings of the theoretical terms used in the hypothesis are determined by what would count as evidence for them.
Counterexamples for this view come from the fact that our idea of what counts as evidence may change while the meanings of the corresponding theoretical terms remain constant.
The most plausible view is that this priority is epistemic in nature, i.e.
that our belief in a hypothesis is justified based on the evidence while the justification for the belief in the evidence does not depend on the hypothesis.
A central issue for the scientific conception of evidence is the problem of underdetermination , i.e.
that the evidence available supports competing theories equally well.
So, for example, evidence from our everyday life about how gravity works confirms Newton's and Einstein's theory of gravitation equally well and is therefore unable to establish consensus among scientists.
But in such cases, it is often the gradual accumulation of evidence that eventually leads to an emerging consensus.
This evidence-driven process towards consensus seems to be one hallmark of the sciences not shared by other fields.
Another problem for the conception of evidence in terms of confirmation of hypotheses is that what some scientists consider the evidence to be may already involve various theoretical assumptions not shared by other scientists.
This phenomenon is known as theory-ladenness .
Some cases of theory-ladenness are relatively uncontroversial, for example, that the numbers output by a measurement device need additional assumptions about how this device works and what was measured in order to count as meaningful evidence.
Other putative cases are more controversial, for example, the idea that different people or cultures perceive the world through different, incommensurable  conceptual schemes , leading them to very different impressions about what is the case and what evidence is available.
Theory-ladenness threatens to impede the role of evidence as neutral arbiter since these additional assumptions may favor some theories over others.
It could thereby also undermine a consensus to emerge since the different parties may be unable to agree even on what the evidence is.
When understood in the widest sense, it is not controversial that some form of theory-ladenness exists.
But it is questionable whether it constitutes a serious threat to scientific evidence when understood in this sense.
Nature of the evidential relation   Philosophers in the 20th century started to investigate the "evidential relation", the relation between evidence and the proposition supported by it.
The issue of the nature of the evidential relation concerns the question of what this relation has to be like in order for one thing to justify a belief or to confirm a hypothesis.
Important theories in this field include the probabilistic approach , hypothetico-deductivism and the positive-instance approach .
Probabilistic approaches , also referred to as Bayesian confirmation theory , explain the evidential relation in terms of probabilities.
They hold that all that is necessary is that the existence of the evidence increases the likelihood that the hypothesis is true.
This can be expressed mathematically as     P  (  H  ∣  E  )  >  P  (  H  )    {\displaystyle P(H\mid E)>P(H)}   .
In words: a piece of evidence (E) confirms a hypothesis (H) if the conditional probability of this hypothesis relative to the evidence is higher than the unconditional probability of the hypothesis by itself.
Smoke (E), for example, is evidence that there is a fire (H), because the two usually occur together, which is why the likelihood of fire given that there is smoke is higher than the likelihood of fire by itself.
On this view, evidence is akin to an indicator or a symptom of the truth of the hypothesis.
Against this approach, it has been argued that it is too liberal because it allows accidental generalizations as evidence.
Finding a nickel in one's pocket, for example, raises the probability of the hypothesis that "All the coins in my pockets are nickels".
But, according to Alvin Goldman , it should not be considered evidence for this hypothesis since there is no lawful connection between this one nickel and the other coins in the pocket.
Hypothetico-deductivism is a non-probabilistic approach that characterizes the evidential relations in terms of deductive consequences of the hypothesis.
According to this view, "evidence for a hypothesis is a true observational consequence of that hypothesis".
One problem with the characterization so far is that hypotheses usually contain relatively little information and therefore have few if any deductive observational consequences.
So the hypothesis by itself that there is a fire does not entail that smoke is observed.
Instead, various auxiliary assumptions have to be included about the location of the smoke, the fire, the observer, the lighting conditions, the laws of chemistry, etc.
In this way, the evidential relation becomes a three-place relation between evidence, hypothesis and auxiliary assumptions.
This means that whether a thing is evidence for a hypothesis depends on the auxiliary assumptions one holds.
This approach fits well with various scientific practices.
For example, it is often the case that experimental scientists try to find evidence that would confirm or disconfirm a proposed theory.
The hypothetico-deductive approach can be used to predict what should be observed in an experiment if the theory was true.
It thereby explains the evidential relation between the experiment and the theory.
One problem with this approach is that it cannot distinguish between relevant and certain irrelevant cases.
So if smoke is evidence for the hypothesis "there is fire", then it is also evidence for conjunctions including this hypothesis, for example, "there is fire and Socrates was wise", despite the fact that Socrates's wisdom is irrelevant here.
According to the positive-instance approach , an observation sentence is evidence for a universal hypothesis if the sentence describes a positive instance of this hypothesis.
For example, the observation that "this swan is white" is an instance of the universal hypothesis that "all swans are white".
This approach can be given a precise formulation in first-order logic : a proposition is evidence for a hypothesis if it entails the "development of the hypothesis".
Intuitively, the development of the hypothesis is what the hypothesis states if it was restricted to only the individuals mentioned in the evidence.
In the case above, we have the hypothesis "     ∀  x  (  s  w  a  n  (  x  )  →  w  h  i  t  e  (  x  )  )    {\displaystyle \forall x(swan(x)\rightarrow white(x))}   " (all swans are white) which, when restricted to the domain "{a}", containing only the one individual mentioned in the evidence, entails the evidence, i.e. "
s  w  a  n  (  a  )  ∧  w  h  i  t  e  (  a  )    {\displaystyle swan(a)\land white(a)}   " (this swan is white).
One important shortcoming of this approach is that it requires that the hypothesis and the evidence are formulated in the same vocabulary, i.e.
use the same predicates, like "     s  w  a  n    {\displaystyle swan}   " or "     w  h  i  t  e    {\displaystyle white}   " above.
But many scientific theories posit theoretical objects, like electrons or strings in physics, that are not directly observable and therefore cannot show up in the evidence as conceived here.
Empirical evidence (in science)   Main article: Scientific evidence  In scientific research evidence is accumulated through observations of phenomena that occur in the natural world, or which are created as experiments in a laboratory or other controlled conditions.
Scientists tend to focus on how the data used during statistical inference are generated.
Scientific evidence usually goes towards supporting or rejecting a hypothesis .
The burden of proof is on the person making a contentious claim.
Within science, this translates to the burden resting on presenters of a paper, in which the presenters argue for their specific findings.
This paper is placed before a panel of judges where the presenter must defend the thesis against all challenges.
When evidence is contradictory to predicted expectations, the evidence and the ways of making it are often closely scrutinized (see experimenter's regress ) and only at the end of this process is the hypothesis rejected: this can be referred to as ' refutation of the hypothesis'.
The rules for evidence used by science are collected systematically in an attempt to avoid the bias inherent to anecdotal evidence .
Law   The balance scales seen in depictions of Lady Justice can be seen as representing the weighing of evidence in a legal proceeding.
Main article: Evidence (law)  In law, the production and presentation of evidence depend first on establishing on whom the burden of proof lies.
Admissible evidence is that which a court receives and considers for the purposes of deciding a particular case.
Two primary burden-of-proof considerations exist in law.
The first is on whom the burden rests.
In many, especially Western, courts, the burden of proof is placed on the prosecution in criminal cases and the plaintiff in civil cases.
The second consideration is the degree of certitude proof must reach, depending on both the quantity and quality of evidence.
These degrees are different for criminal and civil cases, the former requiring evidence beyond a reasonable doubt , the latter considering only which side has the preponderance of evidence , or whether the proposition is more likely true or false.
The decision-maker, often a jury, but sometimes a judge decides whether the burden of proof has been fulfilled.
After deciding who will carry the burden of proof, the evidence is first gathered and then presented before the court:  Collection   An FBI Evidence Response Team gathering evidence by dusting an area for fingerprints  In a criminal investigation, rather than attempting to prove an abstract or hypothetical point, the evidence gatherers attempt to determine who is responsible for a criminal act.
The focus of criminal evidence is to connect physical evidence and reports of witnesses to a specific person.
Presentation   The path that physical evidence takes from the scene of a crime or the arrest of a suspect to the courtroom is called the chain of custody .
In a criminal case, this path must be clearly documented or attested to by those who handled the evidence.
If the chain of evidence is broken, a defendant may be able to persuade the judge to declare the evidence inadmissible .
Presenting evidence before the court differs from the gathering of evidence in important ways.
Gathering evidence may take many forms; presenting evidence that tends to prove or disprove the point at issue is strictly governed by rules.
Failure to follow these rules leads to any number of consequences.
In law, certain policies allow (or require) evidence to be excluded from consideration based either on indicia relating to reliability, or broader social concerns.
Testimony (which tells) and exhibits (which show) are the two main categories of evidence presented at a trial or hearing.
In the United States, evidence in federal court is admitted or excluded under the Federal Rules of Evidence .
Burden of proof   Main articles: Legal burden of proof and Philosophic burden of proof  The burden of proof is the obligation of a party in an argument or dispute to provide sufficient evidence to shift the other party's or a third party's belief from their initial position.
The burden of proof must be fulfilled by both establishing confirming evidence and negating oppositional evidence.
Conclusions drawn from evidence may be subject to criticism based on a perceived failure to fulfill the burden of proof.
Two principal considerations are:  On whom does the burden of proof rest?
To what degree of certitude must the assertion be supported?
The latter question depends on the nature of the point under contention and determines the quantity and quality of evidence required to meet the burden of proof.
In a criminal trial in the United States, for example, the prosecution carries the burden of proof since the defendant is presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt .
Similarly, in most civil procedures , the plaintiff carries the burden of proof and must convince a judge or jury that the preponderance of the evidence is on their side.
Other legal standards of proof include "reasonable suspicion", "probable cause" (as for arrest ), " prima facie evidence", "credible evidence", "substantial evidence", and "clear and convincing evidence".
In a philosophical debate , there is an implicit burden of proof on the party asserting a claim, since the default position is generally one of neutrality or unbelief.
Each party in a debate will therefore carry the burden of proof for any assertion they make in the argument, although some assertions may be granted by the other party without further evidence.
If the debate is set up as a resolution to be supported by one side and refuted by another, the overall burden of proof is on the side supporting the resolution.
Specific types of evidence   Digital evidence  Personal experience  Physical evidence  Relationship evidence  Scientific evidence  Testimonial evidence  Trace evidence  Page notice  You are not logged in.
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Philosophical position regarding the role of psychology  This article is about the family of philosophical positions.
For the subfield of philosophical study, see Philosophy of psychology .
Psychologism is a family of philosophical positions, according to which certain psychological facts, laws, or entities play a central role in grounding or explaining certain non-psychological facts, laws, or entities.
The word was coined by Johann Eduard Erdmann as Psychologismus , being translated into English as psychologism .
Definition   The Oxford English Dictionary defines psychologism as: "The view or doctrine that a theory of psychology or ideas forms the basis of an account of metaphysics, epistemology, or meaning; (sometimes) spec.
the explanation or derivation of mathematical or logical laws in terms of psychological facts."
Psychologism in epistemology , the idea that its problems "can be solved satisfactorily by the psychological study of the development of mental processes", was argued in John Locke 's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690).
Other forms of psychologism are logical psychologism and mathematical psychologism.
Logical psychologism is a position in logic (or the philosophy of logic) according to which logical laws and mathematical laws are grounded in, derived from, explained or exhausted by psychological facts or laws.
Psychologism in the philosophy of mathematics is the position that mathematical concepts and/or truths are grounded in, derived from or explained by psychological facts or laws.
Viewpoints   John Stuart Mill was accused by Edmund Husserl of being an advocate of a type of logical psychologism, although this may not have been the case.
So were many nineteenth-century German philosophers such as Christoph von Sigwart , Benno Erdmann , Theodor Lipps , Gerardus Heymans , Wilhelm Jerusalem , and Theodor Elsenhans ,  as well as a number of psychologists, past and present (e.g., Wilhelm Wundt  and Gustave Le Bon ).
Psychologism was notably criticized by Gottlob Frege in his anti-psychologistic work The Foundations of Arithmetic , and many of his works and essays, including his review of Husserl's Philosophy of Arithmetic .
Husserl, in the first volume of his Logical Investigations , called "The Prolegomena of Pure Logic", criticized psychologism thoroughly and sought to distance himself from it.
Frege's arguments were largely ignored, while Husserl's were widely discussed.
In "Psychologism and Behaviorism", Ned Block describes psychologism in the philosophy of mind as the view that "whether behavior is intelligent behavior depends on the character of the internal information processing that produces it."
This is in contrast to a behavioral view which would state that intelligence can be ascribed to a being solely via observing its behavior.
This latter type of behavioral view is strongly associated with the Turing test .
Hypothesis of philosopher Jerry Fodor  The language of thought hypothesis ( LOTH ),  sometimes known as thought ordered mental expression ( TOME ),  is a view in linguistics , philosophy of mind and cognitive science , forwarded by American philosopher Jerry Fodor .
It describes the nature of thought as possessing "language-like" or compositional structure (sometimes known as mentalese ).
On this view, simple concepts combine in systematic ways (akin to the rules of grammar in language) to build thoughts.
In its most basic form, the theory states that thought, like language, has syntax.
Using empirical evidence drawn from linguistics and cognitive science to describe mental representation from a philosophical vantage-point, the hypothesis states that thinking takes place in a language of thought (LOT): cognition and cognitive processes are only 'remotely plausible' when expressed as a system of representations that is "tokened" by a linguistic or semantic structure and operated upon by means of a combinatorial syntax.
Linguistic tokens used in mental language describe elementary concepts which are operated upon by logical rules establishing causal connections to allow for complex thought.
Syntax as well as semantics have a causal effect on the properties of this system of mental representations.
These mental representations are not present in the brain in the same way as symbols are present on paper; rather, the LOT is supposed to exist at the cognitive level, the level of thoughts and concepts.
The LOTH has wide-ranging significance for a number of domains in cognitive science .
It relies on a version of functionalist materialism, which holds that mental representations are actualized and modified by the individual holding the propositional attitude, and it challenges eliminative materialism and connectionism .
It implies a strongly rationalist model of cognition in which many of the fundamentals of cognition are innate.
Presentation   The hypothesis applies to thoughts that have propositional content, and is not meant to describe everything that goes on in the mind.
It appeals to the representational theory of thought to explain what those tokens actually are and how they behave.
There must be a mental representation that stands in some unique relationship with the subject of the representation and has specific content.
Complex thoughts get their semantic content from the content of the basic thoughts and the relations that they hold to each other.
Thoughts can only relate to each other in ways that do not violate the syntax of thought.
The syntax by means of which these two sub-parts are combined can be expressed in first-order predicate calculus .
The thought "John is tall" is clearly composed of two sub-parts, the concept of John and the concept of tallness, combined in a manner that may be expressed in first-order predicate calculus as a predicate 'T' ("is tall") that holds of the entity 'j' (John).
A fully articulated proposal for what a LOT would have to take into account greater complexities such as quantification and propositional attitudes (the various attitudes people can have towards statements; for example I might believe or see or merely suspect that John is tall).
Precepts   There can be no higher cognitive processes without mental representation.
The only plausible psychological models represent higher cognitive processes as representational and computational thought needs a representational system as an object upon which to compute.
We must therefore attribute a representational system to organisms for cognition and thought to occur.
There is causal relationship between our intentions and our actions.
Because mental states are structured in a way that causes our intentions to manifest themselves by what we do, there is a connection between how we view the world and ourselves and what we do.
Reception   The language of thought hypothesis has been both controversial and groundbreaking.
Some philosophers reject the LOTH, arguing that our public language is our mental language—a person who speaks English thinks in English.
But others contend that complex thought is present even in those who do not possess a public language (e.g.
babies, aphasics , and even higher-order primates), and therefore some form of mentalese must be innate.
The notion that mental states are causally efficacious diverges from behaviorists like Gilbert Ryle , who held that there is no break between the cause of mental state and effect of behavior.
Rather, Ryle proposed that people act in some way because they are in a disposition to act in that way, that these causal mental states are representational.
An objection to this point comes from John Searle in the form of biological naturalism , a non-representational theory of mind that accepts the causal efficacy of mental states.
Searle divides intentional states into low-level brain activity and high-level mental activity.
The lower-level, nonrepresentational neurophysiological processes have causal power in intention and behavior rather than some higher-level mental representation.
Tim Crane , in his book The Mechanical Mind ,  states that, while he agrees with Fodor, his reason is very different.
A logical objection challenges LOTH’s explanation of how sentences in natural languages get their meaning.
That is the view that “Snow is white” is TRUE if and only if P is TRUE in the LOT, where P means the same thing in LOT as “Snow is white” means in the natural language.
Any symbol manipulation is in need of some way of deriving what those symbols mean.
If the meaning of sentences is explained regarding sentences in the LOT, then the meaning of sentences in LOT must get their meaning from somewhere else.
There seems to be an infinite regress of sentences getting their meaning.
Sentences in natural languages get their meaning from their users (speakers, writers).
Therefore, sentences in mentalese must get their meaning from the way in which they are used by thinkers and so on ad infinitum .
This regress is often called the homunculus regress.
Daniel Dennett accepts that homunculi may be explained by other homunculi and denies that this would yield an infinite regress of homunculi.
Each explanatory homunculus is “stupider” or more basic than the homunculus it explains, but this regress is not infinite but bottoms out at a basic level that is so simple that it does not need interpretation.
John Searle points out that it still follows that the bottom-level homunculi are manipulating some sorts of symbols.
LOTH implies that the mind has some tacit knowledge of the logical rules of inference and the linguistic rules of syntax (sentence structure) and semantics (concept or word meaning).
If LOTH cannot show that the mind knows that it is following the particular set of rules in question, then the mind is not computational because it is not governed by computational rules.
Also, the apparent incompleteness of this set of rules in explaining behavior is pointed out.
Many conscious beings behave in ways that are contrary to the rules of logic.
Yet this irrational behavior is not accounted for by any rules, showing that there is at least some behavior that does not act by this set of rules.
Another objection within representational theory of mind has to do with the relationship between propositional attitudes and representation.
Dennett points out that a chess program can have the attitude of “wanting to get its queen out early,” without having representation or rule that explicitly states this.
A multiplication program on a computer computes in the computer language of 1’s and 0’s, yielding representations that do not correspond with any propositional attitude.
Susan Schneider has recently developed a version of LOT that departs from Fodor's approach in numerous ways.
In her book, The Language of Thought: a New Philosophical Direction, Schneider argues that Fodor's pessimism about the success of cognitive science is misguided, and she outlines an approach to LOT that integrates LOT with neuroscience.
She also stresses that LOT is not wedded to the extreme view that all concepts are innate.
She fashions a new theory of mental symbols, and a related two-tiered theory of concepts, in which a concept's nature is determined by its LOT symbol type and its meaning.
Connection to connectionism   Connectionism is an approach to artificial intelligence that often accepts a lot of the same theoretical framework that LOTH accepts, namely that mental states are computational and causally efficacious and very often that they are representational.
However, connectionism stresses the possibility of thinking machines, most often realized as artificial neural networks , an inter-connectional set of nodes, and describes mental states as able to create memory by modifying the strength of these connections over time.
Some popular types of neural networks are interpretations of units, and learning algorithm.
"Units" can be interpreted as neurons or groups of neurons.
A learning algorithm is such that, over time, a change in connection weight is possible, allowing networks to modify their connections.
Connectionist neural networks are able to change over time via their activation.
An activation is a numerical value that represents any aspect of a unit that a neural network has at any time.
Activation spreading is the spreading or taking over of other  over time of the activation to all other units connected to the activated unit.
Since connectionist models can change over time, supporters of connectionism claim that it can solve the problems that LOTH brings to classical AI.
These problems are those that show that machines with a LOT syntactical framework very often are much better at solving problems and storing data than human minds, yet much worse at things that the human mind is quite adept at such as recognizing facial expressions and objects in photographs and understanding nuanced gestures.
Fodor defends LOTH by arguing that a connectionist model is just some realization or implementation of the classical computational theory of mind and therein necessarily employs a symbol-manipulating LOT.
Fodor and Zenon Pylyshyn use the notion of cognitive architecture in their defense.
Cognitive architecture is the set of basic functions of an organism with representational input and output.
They argue that it is a law of nature that cognitive capacities are productive, systematic and inferentially coherent—they have the ability to produce and understand sentences of a certain structure if they can understand one sentence of that structure.
A cognitive model must have a cognitive architecture that explains these laws and properties in some way that is compatible with the scientific method.
Fodor and Pylyshyn say that cognitive architecture can only explain the property of systematicity by appealing to a system of representations and that connectionism either employs a cognitive architecture of representations or else does not.
If it does, then connectionism uses LOT.
If it does not then it is empirically false.
Connectionists have responded to Fodor and Pylyshyn by denying that connectionism uses LOT, by denying that cognition is essentially a function that uses representational input and output or denying that systematicity is a law of nature that rests on representation.
Some connectionists have developed implementational connectionist models that can generalize in a symbolic fashion by incorporating variables.
Empirical testing   This section needs additional citations for verification .
( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Since LOTH came to be it has been empirically tested.
Not all experiments have confirmed the hypothesis;  In 1971, Roger Shepard and Jacqueline Metzler tested Pylyshyn's particular hypothesis that all symbols are understood by the mind in virtue of their fundamental mathematical descriptions.
Shepard and Metzler's experiment consisted of showing a group of subjects a 2-D line drawing of a 3-D object, and then that same object at some rotation.
According to Shepard and Metzler, if Pylyshyn were correct, then the amount of time it took to identify the object as the same object would not depend on the degree of rotation of the object.
Their finding that the time taken to recognize the object was proportional to its rotation contradicts this hypothesis.
There may be a connection between prior knowledge of what relations hold between objects in the world and the time it takes subjects to recognize the same objects.
For example, it is more likely that subjects will not recognize a hand that is rotated in such a way that it would be physically impossible for an actual hand.
It has since also been empirically tested and supported that the mind might better manipulate mathematical descriptions in topographical wholes.
These findings have illuminated what the mind is not doing in terms of how it manipulates symbols.
Certain deaf adults who neither have capability to learn a spoken language nor have access to a sign language, known as home signers , in fact communicate with both others like them and the outside world using gestures and self-created signing.
Although they have no experience in language or how it works, they are able to conceptualize more than iconic words but move into the abstract, suggesting that they could understand that before creating a gesture to show it.
Ildefonso, a homesigner who learned a main sign language at twenty-seven years of age, found that although his thinking became easier to communicate, he had lost his ability to communicate with other homesigners as well as recall how his thinking worked without language.
Other studies that have been done to discover what thought processes could be non-lingual include a study done in 1969 by Berlin and Kay which indicated that the color spectrum was perceived the same no matter how many words a language had for different colors, and a study done in 1981 and fixed 1983 which alluded, that counterfactuals are processed at the same rate, ease of conveying through words notwithstanding.
Maurits (2011) describes an experiment to measure the word order of the language of thought by the relative time needed to recall the verb, agent, and patient of an event.
It turned out that the agent was recalled most quickly and the verb least quickly, leading to a conclusion of a subject–object–verb language of thought (SOVLOT).
Surprisingly, some languages, e.g., Persian language , have this ordering form, meaning that the brain needs less energy to convert the concepts in this languages into the thought concepts.
German mathematician and philosopher (1646–1716)  "Leibniz" redirects here.
For other uses, see Leibniz (disambiguation) .
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Portrait, 1695 Born 1 July 1646 Leipzig , Saxony, Holy Roman Empire Died 14 November 1716 (1716-11-14) (aged 70) Hanover , Electorate of Hanover, Holy Roman Empire Education  Alte Nikolaischule   Leipzig University ( BA , 1662; MA , 1664; LLB , 1665; Dr. phil.
hab.
, 1666)  University of Jena (1663)   University of Altdorf ( Dr. jur.
, 1666)  Era 17th- / 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Rationalism Pluralistic idealism  Foundationalism  Conceptualism  Optimism Indirect realism  Correspondence theory of truth  Relationism Theses  De Arte Combinatoria (On the Combinatorial Art) (March 1666)  Disputatio Inauguralis de Casibus Perplexis in Jure (Inaugural Disputation on Ambiguous Legal Cases) (November 1666)  Doctoral advisor Bartholomäus Leonhard von Schwendendörffer  (Dr. jur.
thesis advisor)   Other academic advisors  Erhard Weigel (Jena)   Jakob Thomasius (B.A.
advisor)   Johann Adam Schertzer (B.A.
advisor)  Christiaan Huygens  Notable students Jacob Bernoulli (epistolary correspondent) Christian Wolff (epistolary correspondent) Main interests Mathematics , physics , geology , medicine , biology , embryology , epidemiology , veterinary medicine , paleontology , psychology , engineering , librarianship  linguistics , philology , sociology , metaphysics , ethics , economics , diplomacy , history , politics , music theory , poetry , logic , theodicy , universal language , universal science Notable ideas    Algebraic logic Binary code Calculus Differential equations Mathesis universalis Monads Best of all possible worlds Pre-established harmony Identity of indiscernibles Mathematical matrix Mathematical function Newton–Leibniz axiom Leibniz's notation Leibniz integral rule Integral symbol Leibniz harmonic triangle Leibniz's test Leibniz formula for π Leibniz formula for determinants Fractional derivative Chain rule Quotient rule Product rule Leibniz wheel Leibniz's gap Algebra of concepts Vis viva (principle of conservation of energy ) Principle of least action Salva veritate Stepped reckoner Symbolic logic Analysis situs Principle of sufficient reason Law of continuity Transcendental law of homogeneity Ars combinatoria ( alphabet of human thought ) Characteristica universalis Calculus ratiocinator Compossibility Partial fraction decomposition Protogaea Problem of why there is anything at all Pluralistic idealism Metaphysical dynamism Relationism Apperception A priori / a posteriori distinction Deontic logic Well-founded phenomenon    Signature  Part of a series on Theodicy  Key concepts  Absence of good  Augustinian theodicy  Best of all possible worlds  Divine retribution  Dystheism  Epicurean paradox  Free will  Inconsistent triad  Irenaean theodicy  Misotheism  Moral evil  Natural evil  Problem of evil   Notable figures  Saint Augustine  Ehrman  Epicurus  Hick  Hume  Saint Irenaeus  Leibniz  Maistre  Nietzsche  Plantinga  Rowe  Swinburne  Wiesel  v t e  Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz  (1 July 1646  – 14 November 1716) was a German polymath active as a mathematician , philosopher , scientist and diplomat who invented calculus in addition to many other branches of mathematics and statistics .
Leibniz has been called the "last universal genius" due to his knowledge and skills in different fields and because such people became less common during the Industrial Revolution and spread of specialized labor after his lifetime.
He is a prominent figure in both the history of philosophy and the history of mathematics .
He wrote works on philosophy , theology , ethics , politics , law , history , philology , games , music , and other studies.
Leibniz also made major contributions to physics and technology , and anticipated notions that surfaced much later in probability theory , biology , medicine , geology , psychology , linguistics and computer science .
In addition, he contributed to the field of library science by devising a cataloguing system whilst working at the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel , Germany, that would have served as a guide for many of Europe's largest libraries.
Leibniz's contributions to a wide range of subjects were scattered in various learned journals , in tens of thousands of letters and in unpublished manuscripts.
He wrote in several languages, primarily in Latin, French and German.
As a philosopher, he was a leading representative of 17th-century rationalism and idealism .
As a mathematician, his major achievement was the development of the main ideas of differential and integral calculus , independently of Isaac Newton 's contemporaneous developments.
Mathematicians have consistently favored Leibniz's notation as the conventional and more exact expression of calculus.
In the 20th century, Leibniz's notions of the law of continuity and transcendental law of homogeneity found a consistent mathematical formulation by means of non-standard analysis .
He was also a pioneer in the field of mechanical calculators .
While working on adding automatic multiplication and division to Pascal's calculator , he was the first to describe a pinwheel calculator in 1685  and invented the Leibniz wheel , later used in the arithmometer , the first mass-produced mechanical calculator.
In philosophy and theology , Leibniz is most noted for his optimism , i.e.
his conclusion that our world is, in a qualified sense, the best possible world that God could have created , a view sometimes lampooned by other thinkers, such as Voltaire in his satirical  novella  Candide .
Leibniz, along with René Descartes and Baruch Spinoza , was one of the three influential early modern rationalists .
His philosophy also assimilates elements of the scholastic tradition, notably the assumption that some substantive knowledge of reality can be achieved by reasoning from first principles or prior definitions.
The work of Leibniz anticipated modern logic and still influences contemporary analytic philosophy , such as its adopted use of the term " possible world " to define modal notions.
Biography   Early life   Gottfried Leibniz was born on July 1 , 1646, in Leipzig , Saxony, to Friedrich Leibniz and Catharina Schmuck.
He was baptized two days later at St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig ; his godfather was the Lutheran theologian Martin Geier  .
His father died when he was six years old, and Leibniz was raised by his mother.
Leibniz's father had been a Professor of Moral Philosophy at the University of Leipzig , where he also served as dean of philosophy.
The boy inherited his father's personal library.
He was given free access to it from the age of seven, shortly after his father's death.
While Leibniz's schoolwork was largely confined to the study of a small canon of authorities, his father's library enabled him to study a wide variety of advanced philosophical and theological works—ones that he would not have otherwise been able to read until his college years.
Access to his father's library, largely written in Latin , also led to his proficiency in the Latin language, which he achieved by the age of 12.
At the age of 13 he composed 300 hexameters of Latin verse in a single morning for a special event at school.
In April 1661 he enrolled in his father's former university at age 14.
There he was guided, among others, by Jakob Thomasius , previously a student of Friedrich.
Leibniz completed his bachelor's degree in Philosophy in December 1662.
He defended his Disputatio Metaphysica de Principio Individui ( Metaphysical Disputation on the Principle of Individuation ),  which addressed the principle of individuation , on 9 June 1663 , presenting an early version of monadic substance theory.
Leibniz earned his master's degree in Philosophy on 7 February 1664.
In December 1664 he published and defended a dissertation  Specimen Quaestionum Philosophicarum ex Jure collectarum ( An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right ),  arguing for both a theoretical and a pedagogical relationship between philosophy and law.
After one year of legal studies, he was awarded his bachelor's degree in Law on 28 September 1665.
His dissertation was titled De conditionibus ( On Conditions ).
In early 1666, at age 19, Leibniz wrote his first book, De Arte Combinatoria ( On the Combinatorial Art ), the first part of which was also his habilitation thesis in Philosophy, which he defended in March 1666.
De Arte Combinatoria was inspired by Ramon Llull 's Ars Magna and contained a proof of the existence of God , cast in geometrical form, and based on the argument from motion .
His next goal was to earn his license and Doctorate in Law, which normally required three years of study.
In 1666, the University of Leipzig turned down Leibniz's doctoral application and refused to grant him a Doctorate in Law, most likely due to his relative youth.
Leibniz subsequently left Leipzig.
Leibniz then enrolled in the University of Altdorf and quickly submitted a thesis, which he had probably been working on earlier in Leipzig.
The title of his thesis was Disputatio Inauguralis de Casibus Perplexis in Jure ( Inaugural Disputation on Ambiguous Legal Cases ).
Leibniz earned his license to practice law and his Doctorate in Law in November 1666.
He next declined the offer of an academic appointment at Altdorf, saying that "my thoughts were turned in an entirely different direction".
As an adult, Leibniz often introduced himself as "Gottfried von Leibniz".
Many posthumously published editions of his writings presented his name on the title page as " Freiherr G.
W.
von Leibniz."
However, no document has ever been found from any contemporary government that stated his appointment to any form of nobility .
1666–1676   Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz  Leibniz's first position was as a salaried secretary to an alchemical society in Nuremberg .
He knew fairly little about the subject at that time but presented himself as deeply learned.
He soon met Johann Christian von Boyneburg (1622–1672), the dismissed chief minister of the Elector of Mainz , Johann Philipp von Schönborn .
Von Boyneburg hired Leibniz as an assistant, and shortly thereafter reconciled with the Elector and introduced Leibniz to him.
Leibniz then dedicated an essay on law to the Elector in the hope of obtaining employment.
The stratagem worked; the Elector asked Leibniz to assist with the redrafting of the legal code for the Electorate.
In 1669, Leibniz was appointed assessor in the Court of Appeal.
Although von Boyneburg died late in 1672, Leibniz remained under the employment of his widow until she dismissed him in 1674.
Von Boyneburg did much to promote Leibniz's reputation, and the latter's memoranda and letters began to attract favorable notice.
After Leibniz's service to the Elector there soon followed a diplomatic role.
He published an essay, under the pseudonym of a fictitious Polish nobleman, arguing (unsuccessfully) for the German candidate for the Polish crown.
The main force in European geopolitics during Leibniz's adult life was the ambition of Louis XIV of France , backed by French military and economic might.
Meanwhile, the Thirty Years' War had left German-speaking Europe exhausted, fragmented, and economically backward.
Leibniz proposed to protect German-speaking Europe by distracting Louis as follows: France would be invited to take Egypt as a stepping stone towards an eventual conquest of the Dutch East Indies .
In return, France would agree to leave Germany and the Netherlands undisturbed.
This plan obtained the Elector's cautious support.
In 1672, the French government invited Leibniz to Paris for discussion,  but the plan was soon overtaken by the outbreak of the Franco-Dutch War and became irrelevant.
Napoleon's failed invasion of Egypt in 1798 can be seen as an unwitting, late implementation of Leibniz's plan, after the Eastern hemisphere colonial supremacy in Europe had already passed from the Dutch to the British.
Thus Leibniz went to Paris in 1672.
Soon after arriving, he met Dutch physicist and mathematician Christiaan Huygens and realised that his own knowledge of mathematics and physics was patchy.
With Huygens as his mentor, he began a program of self-study that soon pushed him to making major contributions to both subjects, including discovering his version of the differential and integral calculus .
He met Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld , the leading French philosophers of the day, and studied the writings of Descartes and Pascal , unpublished as well as published.
He befriended a German mathematician, Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus ; they corresponded for the rest of their lives.
Stepped reckoner  When it became clear that France would not implement its part of Leibniz's Egyptian plan, the Elector sent his nephew, escorted by Leibniz, on a related mission to the English government in London, early in 1673.
There Leibniz came into acquaintance of Henry Oldenburg and John Collins .
He met with the Royal Society where he demonstrated a calculating machine that he had designed and had been building since 1670.
The machine was able to execute all four basic operations (adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing), and the society quickly made him an external member.
The mission ended abruptly when news of the Elector's death (12 February 1673) reached them.
Leibniz promptly returned to Paris and not, as had been planned, to Mainz.
The sudden deaths of his two patrons in the same winter meant that Leibniz had to find a new basis for his career.
In this regard, a 1669 invitation from Duke John Frederick of Brunswick to visit Hanover proved to have been fateful.
Leibniz had declined the invitation, but had begun corresponding with the duke in 1671.
In 1673, the duke offered Leibniz the post of counsellor.
Leibniz very reluctantly accepted the position two years later, only after it became clear that no employment was forthcoming in Paris, whose intellectual stimulation he relished, or with the Habsburg imperial court.
In 1675 he tried to get admitted to the French Academy of Sciences as a foreign honorary member, but it was considered that there were already enough foreigners there and so no invitation came.
He left Paris in October 1676.
House of Hanover, 1676–1716   Portrait of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Public Library of Hanover, 1703  Leibniz managed to delay his arrival in Hanover until the end of 1676 after making one more short journey to London, where Newton accused him of having seen his unpublished work on calculus in advance.
This was alleged to be evidence supporting the accusation, made decades later, that he had stolen calculus from Newton.
On the journey from London to Hanover, Leibniz stopped in The Hague where he met van Leeuwenhoek , the discoverer of microorganisms.
He also spent several days in intense discussion with Spinoza , who had just completed, but had not published, his masterwork, the Ethics .
Spinoza died very shortly after Leibniz's visit.
In 1677, he was promoted, at his request, to Privy Counselor of Justice, a post he held for the rest of his life.
Leibniz served three consecutive rulers of the House of Brunswick as historian, political adviser, and most consequentially, as librarian of the ducal library.
He thenceforth employed his pen on all the various political, historical, and theological matters involving the House of Brunswick; the resulting documents form a valuable part of the historical record for the period.
Leibniz began promoting a project to use windmills to improve the mining operations in the Harz Mountains.
This project did little to improve mining operations and was shut down by Duke Ernst August in 1685.
Among the few people in north Germany to accept Leibniz were the Electress Sophia of Hanover (1630–1714), her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (1668–1705), the Queen of Prussia and his avowed disciple, and Caroline of Ansbach , the consort of her grandson, the future George II .
To each of these women he was correspondent, adviser, and friend.
In turn, they all approved of Leibniz more than did their spouses and the future king George I of Great Britain .
The population of Hanover was only about 10,000, and its provinciality eventually grated on Leibniz.
Nevertheless, to be a major courtier to the House of Brunswick was quite an honor, especially in light of the meteoric rise in the prestige of that House during Leibniz's association with it.
In 1692, the Duke of Brunswick became a hereditary Elector of the Holy Roman Empire .
The British Act of Settlement 1701 designated the Electress Sophia and her descent as the royal family of England, once both King William III and his sister-in-law and successor, Queen Anne , were dead.
Leibniz played a role in the initiatives and negotiations leading up to that Act, but not always an effective one.
For example, something he published anonymously in England, thinking to promote the Brunswick cause, was formally censured by the British Parliament .
The Brunswicks tolerated the enormous effort Leibniz devoted to intellectual pursuits unrelated to his duties as a courtier, pursuits such as perfecting calculus, writing about other mathematics, logic, physics, and philosophy, and keeping up a vast correspondence.
He began working on calculus in 1674; the earliest evidence of its use in his surviving notebooks is 1675.
By 1677 he had a coherent system in hand, but did not publish it until 1684.
Leibniz's most important mathematical papers were published between 1682 and 1692, usually in a journal which he and Otto Mencke founded in 1682, the Acta Eruditorum .
That journal played a key role in advancing his mathematical and scientific reputation, which in turn enhanced his eminence in diplomacy, history, theology, and philosophy.
Pages from Leibniz's papers in the National Library of Poland  The Elector Ernest Augustus commissioned Leibniz to write a history of the House of Brunswick, going back to the time of Charlemagne or earlier, hoping that the resulting book would advance his dynastic ambitions.
From 1687 to 1690, Leibniz traveled extensively in Germany, Austria, and Italy, seeking and finding archival materials bearing on this project.
Decades went by but no history appeared; the next Elector became quite annoyed at Leibniz's apparent dilatoriness.
Leibniz never finished the project, in part because of his huge output on many other fronts, but also because he insisted on writing a meticulously researched and erudite book based on archival sources, when his patrons would have been quite happy with a short popular book, one perhaps little more than a genealogy with commentary, to be completed in three years or less.
They never knew that he had in fact carried out a fair part of his assigned task: when the material Leibniz had written and collected for his history of the House of Brunswick was finally published in the 19th century, it filled three volumes.
Leibniz was appointed Librarian of the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel , Lower Saxony , in 1691.
In 1708, John Keill , writing in the journal of the Royal Society and with Newton's presumed blessing, accused Leibniz of having plagiarised Newton's calculus.
Thus began the calculus priority dispute which darkened the remainder of Leibniz's life.
A formal investigation by the Royal Society (in which Newton was an unacknowledged participant), undertaken in response to Leibniz's demand for a retraction, upheld Keill's charge.
Historians of mathematics writing since 1900 or so have tended to acquit Leibniz, pointing to important differences between Leibniz's and Newton's versions of calculus.
In 1712, Leibniz began a two-year residence in Vienna , where he was appointed Imperial Court Councillor to the Habsburgs .
On the death of Queen Anne in 1714, Elector George Louis became King George I of Great Britain , under the terms of the 1701 Act of Settlement.
Even though Leibniz had done much to bring about this happy event, it was not to be his hour of glory.
Despite the intercession of the Princess of Wales, Caroline of Ansbach, George I forbade Leibniz to join him in London until he completed at least one volume of the history of the Brunswick family his father had commissioned nearly 30 years earlier.
Moreover, for George I to include Leibniz in his London court would have been deemed insulting to Newton, who was seen as having won the calculus priority dispute and whose standing in British official circles could not have been higher.
Finally, his dear friend and defender, the Dowager Electress Sophia, died in 1714.
In 1716, while traveling in northern Europe, the Russian Tsar  Peter the Great stopped in Bad Pyrmont and met Leibniz, who took interest in Russian matters since 1708 and was appointed advisor in 1711.
Death   Leibniz died in Hanover in 1716.
At the time, he was so out of favor that neither George I (who happened to be near Hanover at that time) nor any fellow courtier other than his personal secretary attended the funeral.
Even though Leibniz was a life member of the Royal Society and the Berlin Academy of Sciences , neither organization saw fit to honor his death.
His grave went unmarked for more than 50 years.
He was, however, eulogized by Fontenelle , before the French Academy of Sciences in Paris, which had admitted him as a foreign member in 1700.
The eulogy was composed at the behest of the Duchess of Orleans , a niece of the Electress Sophia.
Personal life   Leibniz never married.
He proposed to an unknown woman at age 50, but changed his mind when she took too long to decide.
He complained on occasion about money, but the fair sum he left to his sole heir, his sister's stepson, proved that the Brunswicks had paid him fairly well.
In his diplomatic endeavors, he at times verged on the unscrupulous, as was often the case with professional diplomats of his day.
On several occasions, Leibniz backdated and altered personal manuscripts, actions which put him in a bad light during the calculus controversy .
He was charming, well-mannered, and not without humor and imagination.
He had many friends and admirers all over Europe.
He was identified as a Protestant and a philosophical theist .
Leibniz remained committed to Trinitarian Christianity throughout his life.
Philosophy   Leibniz's philosophical thinking appears fragmented because his philosophical writings consist mainly of a multitude of short pieces: journal articles, manuscripts published long after his death, and letters to correspondents.
He wrote two book-length philosophical treatises, of which only the Théodicée of 1710 was published in his lifetime.
Leibniz dated his beginning as a philosopher to his Discourse on Metaphysics , which he composed in 1686 as a commentary on a running dispute between Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld .
This led to an extensive correspondence with Arnauld;  it and the Discourse were not published until the 19th century.
In 1695, Leibniz made his public entrée into European philosophy with a journal article titled "New System of the Nature and Communication of Substances".
Between 1695 and 1705, he composed his New Essays on Human Understanding , a lengthy commentary on John Locke 's 1690 An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , but upon learning of Locke's 1704 death, lost the desire to publish it, so that the New Essays were not published until 1765.
The Monadologie , composed in 1714 and published posthumously, consists of 90 aphorisms.
Leibniz also wrote a short paper, "Primae veritates" ("First Truths"), first published by Louis Couturat in 1903 (pp.
518–523)  summarizing his views on metaphysics .
The paper is undated; that he wrote it while in Vienna in 1689 was determined only in 1999, when the ongoing critical edition finally published Leibniz's philosophical writings for the period 1677–1690.
Couturat's reading of this paper influenced much 20th-century thinking about Leibniz, especially among analytic philosophers .
After a meticulous study (informed by the 1999 additions to the critical edition) of all of Leibniz's philosophical writings up to 1688, Mercer (2001) disagreed with Couturat's reading.
Leibniz met Baruch Spinoza in 1676, read some of his unpublished writings, and had since been influenced by some of Spinoza's ideas.
While Leibniz befriended him and admired Spinoza's powerful intellect, he was also dismayed by Spinoza's conclusions,  especially when these were inconsistent with Christian orthodoxy.
Unlike Descartes and Spinoza, Leibniz had a university education in philosophy.
He was influenced by his Leipzig professor Jakob Thomasius , who also supervised his BA thesis in philosophy.
Leibniz also read Francisco Suárez , a Spanish Jesuit respected even in Lutheran universities.
Leibniz was deeply interested in the new methods and conclusions of Descartes, Huygens, Newton, and Boyle , but the established philosophical ideas in which he was educated influenced his view of their work.
Principles   Leibniz variously invoked one or another of seven fundamental philosophical Principles:    Identity / contradiction .
If a proposition is true, then its negation is false and vice versa.
Identity of indiscernibles .
Two distinct things cannot have all their properties in common.
If every predicate possessed by x is also possessed by y and vice versa, then entities x and y are identical; to suppose two things indiscernible is to suppose the same thing under two names.
Frequently invoked in modern logic and philosophy, the "identity of indiscernibles" is often referred to as Leibniz's Law.
It has attracted the most controversy and criticism, especially from corpuscular philosophy and quantum mechanics.
Sufficient reason .
"There must be a sufficient reason for anything to exist, for any event to occur, for any truth to obtain."
Pre-established harmony .
"he appropriate nature of each substance brings it about that what happens to one corresponds to what happens to all the others, without, however, their acting upon one another directly."
( Discourse on Metaphysics , XIV) A dropped glass shatters because it "knows" it has hit the ground, and not because the impact with the ground "compels" the glass to split.
Law of continuity .
Natura non facit saltus  (literally, "Nature does not make jumps").
Optimism .
"God assuredly always chooses the best."
Plenitude .
Leibniz believed that the best of all possible worlds would actualize every genuine possibility, and argued in Théodicée that this best of all possible worlds will contain all possibilities, with our finite experience of eternity giving no reason to dispute nature's perfection.
Leibniz would on occasion give a rational defense of a specific principle, but more often took them for granted.
Monads   A page from Leibniz's manuscript of the Monadology  Leibniz's best known contribution to metaphysics is his theory of monads , as exposited in Monadologie .
He proposes his theory that the universe is made of an infinite number of simple substances known as monads.
Monads can also be compared to the corpuscles of the mechanical philosophy of René Descartes and others.
These simple substances or monads are the "ultimate units of existence in nature".
Monads have no parts but still exist by the qualities that they have.
These qualities are continuously changing over time, and each monad is unique.
They are also not affected by time and are subject to only creation and annihilation.
Monads are centers of force ; substance is force, while space , matter , and motion are merely phenomenal.
He argued, against Newton, that space , time , and motion are completely relative:  "As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions."
Einstein, who called himself a "Leibnizian", wrote in the introduction to Max Jammer 's book Concepts of Space that Leibnizianism was superior to Newtonianism, and his ideas would have dominated over Newton's had it not been for the poor technological tools of the time; Joseph Agassi argues that Leibniz paved the way for Einstein's theory of relativity .
Leibniz's proof of God can be summarized in the Théodicée .
Reason is governed by the principle of contradiction and the principle of sufficient reason .
Using the principle of reasoning, Leibniz concluded that the first reason of all things is God.
All that we see and experience is subject to change, and the fact that this world is contingent can be explained by the possibility of the world being arranged differently in space and time.
The contingent world must have some necessary reason for its existence.
Leibniz uses a geometry book as an example to explain his reasoning.
If this book was copied from an infinite chain of copies, there must be some reason for the content of the book.
Leibniz concluded that there must be the " monas monadum " or God.
The ontological essence of a monad is its irreducible simplicity.
Unlike atoms, monads possess no material or spatial character.
They also differ from atoms by their complete mutual independence, so that interactions among monads are only apparent.
Instead, by virtue of the principle of pre-established harmony , each monad follows a pre-programmed set of "instructions" peculiar to itself, so that a monad "knows" what to do at each moment.
By virtue of these intrinsic instructions, each monad is like a little mirror of the universe.
Monads need not be "small"; e.g., each human being constitutes a monad, in which case free will is problematic.
Monads are purported to have gotten rid of the problematic:  interaction between mind and matter arising in the system of Descartes ;  lack of individuation inherent to the system of Spinoza , which represents individual creatures as merely accidental.
Theodicy and optimism   Further information: Best of all possible worlds and Philosophical optimism  The Theodicy  tries to justify the apparent imperfections of the world by claiming that it is optimal among all possible worlds .
It must be the best possible and most balanced world, because it was created by an all powerful and all knowing God, who would not choose to create an imperfect world if a better world could be known to him or possible to exist.
In effect, apparent flaws that can be identified in this world must exist in every possible world, because otherwise God would have chosen to create the world that excluded those flaws.
Leibniz asserted that the truths of theology (religion) and philosophy cannot contradict each other, since reason and faith are both "gifts of God" so that their conflict would imply God contending against himself.
The Theodicy is Leibniz's attempt to reconcile his personal philosophical system with his interpretation of the tenets of Christianity.
This project was motivated in part by Leibniz's belief, shared by many philosophers and theologians during the Enlightenment , in the rational and enlightened nature of the Christian religion.
It was also shaped by Leibniz's belief in the perfectibility of human nature (if humanity relied on correct philosophy and religion as a guide), and by his belief that metaphysical necessity must have a rational or logical foundation, even if this metaphysical causality seemed inexplicable in terms of physical necessity (the natural laws identified by science).
In the view of Leibniz, because reason and faith must be entirely reconciled, any tenet of faith which could not be defended by reason must be rejected.
Leibniz then approached one of the central criticisms of Christian theism:  if God is all good , all wise , and all powerful , then how did evil come into the world ?
The answer (according to Leibniz) is that, while God is indeed unlimited in wisdom and power, his human creations, as creations, are limited both in their wisdom and in their will (power to act).
This predisposes humans to false beliefs, wrong decisions, and ineffective actions in the exercise of their free will .
God does not arbitrarily inflict pain and suffering on humans; rather he permits both moral evil (sin) and physical evil (pain and suffering) as the necessary consequences of metaphysical evil (imperfection), as a means by which humans can identify and correct their erroneous decisions, and as a contrast to true good.
Further, although human actions flow from prior causes that ultimately arise in God and therefore are known to God as metaphysical certainties, an individual's free will is exercised within natural laws, where choices are merely contingently necessary and to be decided in the event by a "wonderful spontaneity" that provides individuals with an escape from rigorous predestination.
Discourse on Metaphysics   For Leibniz, "God is an absolutely perfect being".
He describes this perfection later in section VI as the simplest form of something with the most substantial outcome (VI).
Along these lines, he declares that every type of perfection "pertains to him (God) in the highest degree" (I).
Even though his types of perfections are not specifically drawn out, Leibniz highlights the one thing that, to him, does certify imperfections and proves that God is perfect: "that one acts imperfectly if he acts with less perfection than he is capable of", and since God is a perfect being, he cannot act imperfectly (III).
Because God cannot act imperfectly, the decisions he makes pertaining to the world must be perfect.
Leibniz also comforts readers, stating that because he has done everything to the most perfect degree; those who love him cannot be injured.
However, to love God is a subject of difficulty as Leibniz believes that we are "not disposed to wish for that which God desires" because we have the ability to alter our disposition (IV).
In accordance with this, many act as rebels, but Leibniz says that the only way we can truly love God is by being content "with all that comes to us according to his will" (IV).
Because God is "an absolutely perfect being" (I), Leibniz argues that God would be acting imperfectly if he acted with any less perfection than what he is able of (III).
His syllogism then ends with the statement that God has made the world perfectly in all ways.
This also affects how we should view God and his will.
Leibniz states that, in lieu of God's will, we have to understand that God "is the best of all masters" and he will know when his good succeeds, so we, therefore, must act in conformity to his good will—or as much of it as we understand (IV).
In our view of God, Leibniz declares that we cannot admire the work solely because of the maker, lest we mar the glory and love God in doing so.
Instead, we must admire the maker for the work he has done (II).
Effectively, Leibniz states that if we say the earth is good because of the will of God, and not good according to some standards of goodness, then how can we praise God for what he has done if contrary actions are also praiseworthy by this definition (II).
Leibniz then asserts that different principles and geometry cannot simply be from the will of God, but must follow from his understanding.
Leibniz wrote: " Why is there something rather than nothing?
The sufficient reason ...
is found in a substance which ...
is a necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself."
Martin Heidegger called this question "the fundamental question of metaphysics".
Symbolic thought and rational resolution of disputes   Leibniz believed that much of human reasoning could be reduced to calculations of a sort, and that such calculations could resolve many differences of opinion:  The only way to rectify our reasonings is to make them as tangible as those of the Mathematicians, so that we can find our error at a glance, and when there are disputes among persons, we can simply say: Let us calculate, without further ado, to see who is right.
Leibniz's calculus ratiocinator , which resembles symbolic logic , can be viewed as a way of making such calculations feasible.
Leibniz wrote memoranda  that can now be read as groping attempts to get symbolic logic—and thus his calculus —off the ground.
These writings remained unpublished until the appearance of a selection edited by Carl Immanuel Gerhardt (1859).
Louis Couturat published a selection in 1901; by this time the main developments of modern logic had been created by Charles Sanders Peirce and by Gottlob Frege .
Leibniz thought symbols were important for human understanding.
He attached so much importance to the development of good notations that he attributed all his discoveries in mathematics to this.
His notation for calculus is an example of his skill in this regard.
Leibniz's passion for symbols and notation, as well as his belief that these are essential to a well-running logic and mathematics, made him a precursor of semiotics .
But Leibniz took his speculations much further.
Defining a character as any written sign, he then defined a "real" character as one that represents an idea directly and not simply as the word embodying the idea.
Some real characters, such as the notation of logic, serve only to facilitate reasoning.
Many characters well known in his day, including Egyptian hieroglyphics , Chinese characters , and the symbols of astronomy and chemistry , he deemed not real.
Instead, he proposed the creation of a characteristica universalis or "universal characteristic", built on an alphabet of human thought in which each fundamental concept would be represented by a unique "real" character:  It is obvious that if we could find characters or signs suited for expressing all our thoughts as clearly and as exactly as arithmetic expresses numbers or geometry expresses lines, we could do in all matters insofar as they are subject to reasoning all that we can do in arithmetic and geometry.
For all investigations which depend on reasoning would be carried out by transposing these characters and by a species of calculus.
Complex thoughts would be represented by combining characters for simpler thoughts.
Leibniz saw that the uniqueness of prime factorization suggests a central role for prime numbers in the universal characteristic, a striking anticipation of Gödel numbering .
Granted, there is no intuitive or mnemonic way to number any set of elementary concepts using the prime numbers.
Because Leibniz was a mathematical novice when he first wrote about the characteristic , at first he did not conceive it as an algebra but rather as a universal language or script.
Only in 1676 did he conceive of a kind of "algebra of thought", modeled on and including conventional algebra and its notation.
The resulting characteristic included a logical calculus, some combinatorics, algebra, his analysis situs (geometry of situation), a universal concept language, and more.
What Leibniz actually intended by his characteristica universalis and calculus ratiocinator, and the extent to which modern formal logic does justice to calculus, may never be established.
Leibniz's idea of reasoning through a universal language of symbols and calculations remarkably foreshadows great 20th-century developments in formal systems, such as Turing completeness , where computation was used to define equivalent universal languages (see Turing degree ).
Formal logic   Main article: Algebraic logic  Leibniz has been noted as one of the most important logicians between the times of Aristotle and Gottlob Frege .
Leibniz enunciated the principal properties of what we now call conjunction , disjunction , negation , identity , set inclusion , and the empty set .
The principles of Leibniz's logic and, arguably, of his whole philosophy, reduce to two:  All our ideas are compounded from a very small number of simple ideas, which form the alphabet of human thought .
Complex ideas proceed from these simple ideas by a uniform and symmetrical combination, analogous to arithmetical multiplication.
The formal logic that emerged early in the 20th century also requires, at minimum, unary negation and quantified  variables ranging over some universe of discourse .
Leibniz published nothing on formal logic in his lifetime; most of what he wrote on the subject consists of working drafts.
In his History of Western Philosophy , Bertrand Russell went so far as to claim that Leibniz had developed logic in his unpublished writings to a level which was reached only 200 years later.
Russell's principal work on Leibniz found that many of Leibniz's most startling philosophical ideas and claims (e.g., that each of the fundamental monads mirrors the whole universe) follow logically from Leibniz's conscious choice to reject relations between things as unreal.
He regarded such relations as (real) qualities of things (Leibniz admitted unary  predicates only): For him, "Mary is the mother of John" describes separate qualities of Mary and of John.
This view contrasts with the relational logic of De Morgan , Peirce , Schröder and Russell himself, now standard in predicate logic .
Notably, Leibniz also declared space and time to be inherently relational.
Leibniz's 1690 discovery of his algebra of concepts   (deductively equivalent to the Boolean algebra )  and the associated metaphysics, are of interest in present-day computational metaphysics .
Mathematics   Although the mathematical notion of function was implicit in trigonometric and logarithmic tables, which existed in his day, Leibniz was the first, in 1692 and 1694, to employ it explicitly, to denote any of several geometric concepts derived from a curve, such as abscissa , ordinate , tangent , chord , and the perpendicular (see History of the function concept ).
In the 18th century, "function" lost these geometrical associations.
Leibniz was also one of the pioneers in actuarial science , calculating the purchase price of life annuities and the liquidation of a state's debt.
Leibniz's research into formal logic, also relevant to mathematics, is discussed in the preceding section .
The best overview of Leibniz's writings on calculus may be found in Bos (1974).
Leibniz, who invented one of the earliest mechanical calculators, said of calculation : "For it is unworthy of excellent men to lose hours like slaves in the labor of calculation which could safely be relegated to anyone else if machines were used."
Linear systems   Leibniz arranged the coefficients of a system of linear equations into an array, now called a matrix , in order to find a solution to the system if it existed.
This method was later called Gaussian elimination .
Leibniz laid down the foundations and theory of determinants , although the Japanese mathematician Seki Takakazu also discovered determinants independently of Leibniz.
His works show calculating the determinants using cofactors.
Calculating the determinant using cofactors is named the Leibniz formula .
Finding the determinant of a matrix using this method proves impractical with large n , requiring to calculate n!
products and the number of n-permutations.
He also solved systems of linear equations using determinants, which is now called Cramer's rule .
This method for solving systems of linear equations based on determinants was found in 1684 by Leibniz (Cramer published his findings in 1750).
Although Gaussian elimination requires     O  (   n   3    )    {\displaystyle O(n^{3})}   arithmetic operations, linear algebra textbooks still teach cofactor expansion before LU factorization .
Geometry   The Leibniz formula for π states that      1   −     1  3     +     1  5     −     1  7     +   ⋯   =     π  4    .
{\displaystyle 1\,-\,{\frac {1}{3}}\,+\,{\frac {1}{5}}\,-\,{\frac {1}{7}}\,+\,\cdots \,=\,{\frac {\pi }{4}}.}
Leibniz wrote that circles "can most simply be expressed by this series, that is, the aggregate of fractions alternately added and subtracted".
However this formula is only accurate with a large number of terms, using 10,000,000 terms to obtain the correct value of π / 4 to 8 decimal places.
Leibniz attempted to create a definition for a straight line while attempting to prove the parallel postulate .
While most mathematicians defined a straight line as the shortest line between two points, Leibniz believed that this was merely a property of a straight line rather than the definition.
Calculus   Leibniz is credited, along with Isaac Newton , with the discovery of calculus (differential and integral calculus).
According to Leibniz's notebooks, a critical breakthrough occurred on 11 November 1675, when he employed integral calculus for the first time to find the area under the graph of a function y = f ( x ) .
He introduced several notations used to this day, for instance the integral sign  ∫ (      ∫  f  (  x  )   d  x     {\displaystyle \displaystyle \int f(x)\,dx}   ), representing an elongated S, from the Latin word summa , and the d used for differentials (        d  y    d  x       {\displaystyle {\frac {dy}{dx}}}   ), from the Latin word differentia .
Leibniz did not publish anything about his calculus until 1684.
Leibniz expressed the inverse relation of integration and differentiation, later called the fundamental theorem of calculus , by means of a figure  in his 1693 paper Supplementum geometriae dimensoriae...
.
However, James Gregory is credited for the theorem's discovery in geometric form, Isaac Barrow proved a more generalized geometric version, and Newton developed supporting theory.
The concept became more transparent as developed through Leibniz's formalism and new notation.
The product rule of differential calculus is still called "Leibniz's law".
In addition, the theorem that tells how and when to differentiate under the integral sign is called the Leibniz integral rule .
Leibniz exploited infinitesimals in developing calculus, manipulating them in ways suggesting that they had paradoxical  algebraic properties.
George Berkeley , in a tract called The Analyst and also in De Motu , criticized these.
A recent study argues that Leibnizian calculus was free of contradictions, and was better grounded than Berkeley's empiricist criticisms.
From 1711 until his death, Leibniz was engaged in a dispute with John Keill, Newton and others, over whether Leibniz had invented calculus independently of Newton.
The use of infinitesimals in mathematics was frowned upon by followers of Karl Weierstrass ,   but survived in science and engineering, and even in rigorous mathematics, via the fundamental computational device known as the differential .
Beginning in 1960, Abraham Robinson worked out a rigorous foundation for Leibniz's infinitesimals, using model theory , in the context of a field of hyperreal numbers .
The resulting non-standard analysis can be seen as a belated vindication of Leibniz's mathematical reasoning.
Robinson's transfer principle is a mathematical implementation of Leibniz's heuristic law of continuity , while the standard part function implements the Leibnizian transcendental law of homogeneity .
Topology   Leibniz was the first to use the term analysis situs ,  later used in the 19th century to refer to what is now known as topology .
There are two takes on this situation.
On the one hand, Mates, citing a 1954 paper in German by Jacob Freudenthal , argues:  Although for Leibniz the situs of a sequence of points is completely determined by the distance between them and is altered if those distances are altered, his admirer Euler , in the famous 1736 paper solving the Königsberg Bridge Problem and its generalizations, used the term geometria situs in such a sense that the situs remains unchanged under topological deformations.
He mistakenly credits Leibniz with originating this concept.
...
 is sometimes not realized that Leibniz used the term in an entirely different sense and hence can hardly be considered the founder of that part of mathematics.
But Hideaki Hirano argues differently, quoting Mandelbrot :    To sample Leibniz' scientific works is a sobering experience.
Next to calculus, and to other thoughts that have been carried out to completion, the number and variety of premonitory thrusts is overwhelming.
We saw examples in "packing", ...
My Leibniz mania is further reinforced by finding that for one moment its hero attached importance to geometric scaling.
In Euclidis Prota ..., which is an attempt to tighten Euclid's axioms, he states ...: "I have diverse definitions for the straight line.
The straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole, and it alone has this property, not only among curves but among sets."
This claim can be proved today.
Thus the fractal geometry promoted by Mandelbrot drew on Leibniz's notions of self-similarity and the principle of continuity: Natura non facit saltus .
We also see that when Leibniz wrote, in a metaphysical vein, that "the straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole", he was anticipating topology by more than two centuries.
As for "packing", Leibniz told his friend and correspondent Des Bosses to imagine a circle, then to inscribe within it three congruent circles with maximum radius; the latter smaller circles could be filled with three even smaller circles by the same procedure.
This process can be continued infinitely, from which arises a good idea of self-similarity.
Leibniz's improvement of Euclid's axiom contains the same concept.
Science and engineering   Leibniz's writings are currently discussed, not only for their anticipations and possible discoveries not yet recognized, but as ways of advancing present knowledge.
Much of his writing on physics is included in Gerhardt's Mathematical Writings .
Physics   See also: Dynamism (metaphysics) and Conatus § In Leibniz  Leibniz contributed a fair amount to the statics and dynamics emerging around him, often disagreeing with Descartes and Newton .
He devised a new theory of motion ( dynamics ) based on kinetic energy and potential energy , which posited space as relative, whereas Newton was thoroughly convinced that space was absolute.
An important example of Leibniz's mature physical thinking is his Specimen Dynamicum of 1695.
Until the discovery of subatomic particles and the quantum mechanics governing them, many of Leibniz's speculative ideas about aspects of nature not reducible to statics and dynamics made little sense.
For instance, he anticipated Albert Einstein by arguing, against Newton, that space , time and motion are relative, not absolute: "As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions."
Leibniz held a relationist notion of space and time, against Newton's substantivalist views.
According to Newton's substantivalism, space and time are entities in their own right, existing independently of things.
Leibniz's relationism, in contrast, describes space and time as systems of relations that exist between objects.
The rise of general relativity and subsequent work in the history of physics has put Leibniz's stance in a more favorable light.
One of Leibniz's projects was to recast Newton's theory as a vortex theory .
However, his project went beyond vortex theory, since at its heart there was an attempt to explain one of the most difficult problems in physics, that of the origin of the cohesion of matter .
The principle of sufficient reason has been invoked in recent cosmology , and his identity of indiscernibles in quantum mechanics, a field some even credit him with having anticipated in some sense.
In addition to his theories about the nature of reality, Leibniz's contributions to the development of calculus have also had a major impact on physics.
The vis viva   Leibniz's vis viva (Latin for "living force") is m v 2 , twice the modern kinetic energy .
He realized that the total energy would be conserved in certain mechanical systems, so he considered it an innate motive characteristic of matter.
Here too his thinking gave rise to another regrettable nationalistic dispute.
His vis viva was seen as rivaling the conservation of momentum championed by Newton in England and by Descartes and Voltaire in France; hence academics in those countries tended to neglect Leibniz's idea.
Leibniz knew of the validity of conservation of momentum.
In reality, both energy and momentum are conserved (in closed systems ), so both approaches are valid.
Other natural science   By proposing that the earth has a molten core, he anticipated modern geology.
In embryology , he was a preformationist, but also proposed that organisms are the outcome of a combination of an infinite number of possible microstructures and of their powers.
In the life sciences and paleontology , he revealed an amazing transformist intuition, fueled by his study of comparative anatomy and fossils.
One of his principal works on this subject, Protogaea , unpublished in his lifetime, has recently been published in English for the first time.
He worked out a primal organismic theory .
In medicine, he exhorted the physicians of his time—with some results—to ground their theories in detailed comparative observations and verified experiments, and to distinguish firmly scientific and metaphysical points of view.
Psychology   Psychology had been a central interest of Leibniz.
He appears to be an "underappreciated pioneer of psychology"  He wrote on topics which are now regarded as fields of psychology: attention and consciousness , memory , learning ( association ), motivation (the act of "striving"), emergent individuality , the general dynamics of development ( evolutionary psychology ).
His discussions in the New Essays and Monadology often rely on everyday observations such as the behaviour of a dog or the noise of the sea, and he develops intuitive analogies (the synchronous running of clocks or the balance spring of a clock).
He also devised postulates and principles that apply to psychology: the continuum of the unnoticed petites perceptions to the distinct, self-aware apperception , and psychophysical parallelism from the point of view of causality and of purpose: "Souls act according to the laws of final causes, through aspirations, ends and means.
Bodies act according to the laws of efficient causes, i.e.
the laws of motion.
And these two realms, that of efficient causes and that of final causes, harmonize with one another."
This idea refers to the mind-body problem, stating that the mind and brain do not act upon each other, but act alongside each other separately but in harmony.
Leibniz, however, did not use the term psychologia .
Leibniz's epistemological position—against John Locke and English empiricism ( sensualism )—was made clear: "Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuerit in sensu, nisi intellectu ipse."
– "Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in the senses, except the intellect itself."
Principles that are not present in sensory impressions can be recognised in human perception and consciousness: logical inferences, categories of thought, the principle of causality and the principle of purpose ( teleology ).
Leibniz found his most important interpreter in Wilhelm Wundt , founder of psychology as a discipline.
Wundt used the "… nisi intellectu ipse" quotation 1862 on the title page of his Beiträge zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung (Contributions on the Theory of Sensory Perception) and published a detailed and aspiring monograph on Leibniz.
Wundt shaped the term apperception , introduced by Leibniz, into an experimental psychologically based apperception psychology that included neuropsychological modelling – an excellent example of how a concept created by a great philosopher could stimulate a psychological research program.
One principle in the thinking of Leibniz played a fundamental role: "the principle of equality of separate but corresponding viewpoints."
Wundt characterized this style of thought ( perspectivism ) in a way that also applied for him—viewpoints that "supplement one another, while also being able to appear as opposites that only resolve themselves when considered more deeply."
Much of Leibniz's work went on to have a great impact on the field of psychology.
Leibniz thought that there are many petites perceptions, or small perceptions of which we perceive but of which we are unaware.
He believed that by the principle that phenomena found in nature were continuous by default, it was likely that the transition between conscious and unconscious states had intermediary steps.
For this to be true, there must also be a portion of the mind of which we are unaware at any given time.
His theory regarding consciousness in relation to the principle of continuity can be seen as an early theory regarding the stages of sleep .
In this way, Leibniz's theory of perception can be viewed as one of many theories leading up to the idea of the unconscious .
Leibniz was a direct influence on Ernst Platner , who is credited with originally coining the term Unbewußtseyn (unconscious).
Additionally, the idea of subliminal stimuli can be traced back to his theory of small perceptions.
Leibniz's ideas regarding music and tonal perception went on to influence the laboratory studies of Wilhelm Wundt.
Social science   This section does not cite any sources .
( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  In public health, he advocated establishing a medical administrative authority, with powers over epidemiology and veterinary medicine .
He worked to set up a coherent medical training program, oriented towards public health and preventive measures.
In economic policy, he proposed tax reforms and a national insurance program, and discussed the balance of trade .
He even proposed something akin to what much later emerged as game theory .
In sociology he laid the ground for communication theory .
Technology   In 1906, Garland published a volume of Leibniz's writings bearing on his many practical inventions and engineering work.
To date, few of these writings have been translated into English.
Nevertheless, it is well understood that Leibniz was a serious inventor, engineer, and applied scientist, with great respect for practical life.
Following the motto theoria cum praxi , he urged that theory be combined with practical application, and thus has been claimed as the father of applied science .
He designed wind-driven propellers and water pumps, mining machines to extract ore, hydraulic presses, lamps, submarines, clocks, etc.
With Denis Papin , he created a steam engine .
He even proposed a method for desalinating water.
From 1680 to 1685, he struggled to overcome the chronic flooding that afflicted the ducal silver mines in the Harz Mountains , but did not succeed.
Computation   Leibniz may have been the first computer scientist and information theorist.
Early in life, he documented the binary numeral system ( base 2), then revisited that system throughout his career.
While Leibniz was examining other cultures to compare his metaphysical views, he encountered an ancient Chinese book I Ching .
Leibniz interpreted a diagram which showed yin and yang and corresponded it to a zero and one.
More information can be found in the Sinophology section.
Leibniz had similarities with Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz and Thomas Harriot , who independently developed the binary system, as he was familiar with their works on the binary system.
Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz worked extensively on logarithms including logarithms with base 2.
Thomas Harriot's manuscripts contained a table of binary numbers and their notation, which demonstrated that any number could be written on a base 2 system.
Regardless, Leibniz simplified the binary system and articulated logical properties such as conjunction, disjunction, negation, identity, inclusion, and the empty set.
He anticipated Lagrangian interpolation and algorithmic information theory .
His calculus ratiocinator anticipated aspects of the universal Turing machine .
In 1961, Norbert Wiener suggested that Leibniz should be considered the patron saint of cybernetics .
Wiener is quoted with "Indeed, the general idea of a computing machine is nothing but a mechanization of Leibniz's Calculus Ratiocinator."
In 1671, Leibniz began to invent a machine that could execute all four arithmetic operations, gradually improving it over a number of years.
This " stepped reckoner " attracted fair attention and was the basis of his election to the Royal Society in 1673.
A number of such machines were made during his years in Hanover by a craftsman working under his supervision.
They were not an unambiguous success because they did not fully mechanize the carry operation .
Couturat reported finding an unpublished note by Leibniz, dated 1674, describing a machine capable of performing some algebraic operations.
Leibniz also devised a (now reproduced) cipher machine, recovered by Nicholas Rescher in 2010.
In 1693, Leibniz described a design of a machine which could, in theory, integrate differential equations, which he called "integraph".
Leibniz was groping towards hardware and software concepts worked out much later by Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace .
In 1679, while mulling over his binary arithmetic, Leibniz imagined a machine in which binary numbers were represented by marbles, governed by a rudimentary sort of punched cards.
Modern electronic digital computers replace Leibniz's marbles moving by gravity with shift registers, voltage gradients, and pulses of electrons, but otherwise they run roughly as Leibniz envisioned in 1679.
Librarian   Later in Leibniz's career (after the death of von Boyneburg), Leibniz moved to Paris and accepted a position as a librarian in the Hanoverian court of Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg.
Leibniz's predecessor, Tobias Fleischer, had already created a cataloging system for the Duke's library but it was a clumsy attempt.
At this library, Leibniz focused more on advancing the library than on the cataloging.
For instance, within a month of taking the new position, he developed a comprehensive plan to expand the library.
He was one of the first to consider developing a core collection for a library and felt "that a library for display and ostentation is a luxury and indeed superfluous, but a well-stocked and organized library is important and useful for all areas of human endeavor and is to be regarded on the same level as schools and churches".
Leibniz lacked the funds to develop the library in this manner.
After working at this library, by the end of 1690 Leibniz was appointed as privy-councilor and librarian of the Bibliotheca Augusta at Wolfenbüttel.
It was an extensive library with at least 25,946 printed volumes.
At this library, Leibniz sought to improve the catalog.
He was not allowed to make complete changes to the existing closed catalog, but was allowed to improve upon it so he started on that task immediately.
He created an alphabetical author catalog and had also created other cataloging methods that were not implemented.
While serving as librarian of the ducal libraries in Hanover and Wolfenbüttel , Leibniz effectively became one of the founders of library science .
Seemingly, Leibniz paid a good deal of attention to the classification of subject matter, favoring a well-balanced library covering a host of numerous subjects and interests.
Leibniz, for example, proposed the following classification system in the Otivm Hanoveranvm Sive Miscellanea (1737):     Theology  Jurisprudence  Medicine  Intellectual Philosophy  Philosophy of the Imagination or Mathematics  Philosophy of Sensible Things or Physics  Philology or Language  Civil History  Literary History and Libraries  General and Miscellaneous  He also designed a book indexing system in ignorance of the only other such system then extant, that of the Bodleian Library at Oxford University .
He also called on publishers to distribute abstracts of all new titles they produced each year, in a standard form that would facilitate indexing.
He hoped that this abstracting project would eventually include everything printed from his day back to Gutenberg .
Neither proposal met with success at the time, but something like them became standard practice among English language publishers during the 20th century, under the aegis of the Library of Congress and the British Library .
He called for the creation of an empirical  database as a way to further all sciences.
His characteristica universalis , calculus ratiocinator , and a "community of minds"—intended, among other things, to bring political and religious unity to Europe—can be seen as distant unwitting anticipations of artificial languages (e.g., Esperanto and its rivals), symbolic logic , even the World Wide Web .
Advocate of scientific societies   Leibniz emphasized that research was a collaborative endeavor.
Hence he warmly advocated the formation of national scientific societies along the lines of the British Royal Society and the French Académie Royale des Sciences.
More specifically, in his correspondence and travels he urged the creation of such societies in Dresden, Saint Petersburg , Vienna, and Berlin.
Only one such project came to fruition; in 1700, the Berlin Academy of Sciences was created.
Leibniz drew up its first statutes, and served as its first President for the remainder of his life.
That Academy evolved into the German Academy of Sciences, the publisher of the ongoing critical edition of his works.
Law and Morality   Leibniz's writings on law, ethics, and politics  were long overlooked by English-speaking scholars, but this has changed of late.
While Leibniz was no apologist for absolute monarchy like Hobbes , or for tyranny in any form, neither did he echo the political and constitutional views of his contemporary John Locke , views invoked in support of liberalism, in 18th-century America and later elsewhere.
The following excerpt from a 1695 letter to Baron J.
C.
Boyneburg's son Philipp is very revealing of Leibniz's political sentiments:  As for ...
the great question of the power of sovereigns and the obedience their peoples owe them, I usually say that it would be good for princes to be persuaded that their people have the right to resist them, and for the people, on the other hand, to be persuaded to obey them passively.
I am, however, quite of the opinion of Grotius , that one ought to obey as a rule, the evil of revolution being greater beyond comparison than the evils causing it.
Yet I recognize that a prince can go to such excess, and place the well-being of the state in such danger, that the obligation to endure ceases.
This is most rare, however, and the theologian who authorizes violence under this pretext should take care against excess; excess being infinitely more dangerous than deficiency.
In 1677, Leibniz called for a European confederation, governed by a council or senate, whose members would represent entire nations and would be free to vote their consciences;  this is sometimes considered an anticipation of the European Union .
He believed that Europe would adopt a uniform religion.
He reiterated these proposals in 1715.
But at the same time, he arrived to propose an interreligious and multicultural project to create a universal system of justice, which required from him a broad interdisciplinary perspective.
In order to propose it, he combined linguistics (especially sinology), moral and legal philosophy, management, economics, and politics.
Law   Leibniz trained as a legal academic, but under the tutelage of Cartesian-sympathiser Erhard Weigel we already see an attempt to solve legal problems by rationalist mathematical methods (Weigel's influence being most explicit in the Specimen Quaestionum Philosophicarum ex Jure collectarum (An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right)).
For example, the Inaugural Disputation on Perplexing Cases  uses early combinatorics to solve some legal disputes, while the 1666 Dissertation on the Combinatorial Art  includes simple legal problems by way of illustration.
The use of combinatorial methods to solve legal and moral problems seems, via Athanasius Kircher and Daniel Schwenter to be of Llullist inspiration: Ramón Llull attempted to solve ecumenical disputes through recourse to a combinatorial mode of reasoning he regarded as universal (a mathesis universalis).
In the late 1660s the enlightened Prince-Bishop of Mainz Johann Philipp von Schönborn announced a review of the legal system and made available a position to support his current law commissioner.
Leibniz left Franconia and made for Mainz before even winning the role.
On reaching Frankfurt am Main Leibniz penned The New Method of Teaching and Learning the Law, by way of application.
The text proposed a reform of legal education and is characteristically syncretic, integrating aspects of Thomism, Hobbesianism, Cartesianism and traditional jurisprudence.
Leibniz's argument that the function of legal teaching was not to impress rules as one might train a dog, but to aid the student in discovering their own public reason, evidently impressed von Schönborn as he secured the job.
Leibniz's next major attempt to find a universal rational core to law and so found a legal "science of right",  came when Leibniz worked in Mainz from 1667–72.
Starting initially from Hobbes' mechanistic doctrine of power, Leibniz reverted to logico-combinatorial methods in an attempt to define justice.
As Leibniz's so-called Elementa Juris Naturalis advanced, he built in modal notions of right (possibility) and obligation (necessity) in which we see perhaps the earliest elaboration of his possible worlds doctrine within a deontic frame.
While ultimately the Elementa remained unpublished, Leibniz continued to work on his drafts and promote their ideas to correspondents up until his death.
Ecumenism   This section does not cite any sources .
( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Leibniz devoted considerable intellectual and diplomatic effort to what would now be called an ecumenical endeavor, seeking to reconcile the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches.
In this respect, he followed the example of his early patrons, Baron von Boyneburg and the Duke John Frederick —both cradle Lutherans who converted to Catholicism as adults—who did what they could to encourage the reunion of the two faiths, and who warmly welcomed such endeavors by others.
(The House of Brunswick remained Lutheran, because the Duke's children did not follow their father.)
These efforts included corresponding with French bishop Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet , and involved Leibniz in some theological controversy.
He evidently thought that the thoroughgoing application of reason would suffice to heal the breach caused by the Reformation .
Philology   Leibniz the philologist was an avid student of languages, eagerly latching on to any information about vocabulary and grammar that came his way.
In 1710, he applied ideas of gradualism and uniformitarianism to linguistics in a short essay.
He refuted the belief, widely held by Christian scholars of the time, that Hebrew was the primeval language of the human race.
At the same time, he rejected the idea of unrelated language groups and considered them all to have a common source.
He also refuted the argument, advanced by Swedish scholars in his day, that a form of proto- Swedish was the ancestor of the Germanic languages .
He puzzled over the origins of the Slavic languages and was fascinated by classical Chinese .
Leibniz was also an expert in the Sanskrit language.
He published the princeps editio (first modern edition) of the late medieval  Chronicon Holtzatiae , a Latin chronicle of the County of Holstein .
Sinophology   A diagram of I Ching hexagrams sent to Leibniz from Joachim Bouvet .
The Arabic numerals were added by Leibniz.
Leibniz was perhaps the first major European intellectual to take a close interest in Chinese civilization, which he knew by corresponding with, and reading other works by, European Christian missionaries posted in China.
He apparently read Confucius Sinarum Philosophus in the first year of its publication.
He came to the conclusion that Europeans could learn much from the Confucian ethical tradition.
He mulled over the possibility that the Chinese characters were an unwitting form of his universal characteristic .
He noted how the I Ching hexagrams correspond to the binary numbers from 000000 to 111111, and concluded that this mapping was evidence of major Chinese accomplishments in the sort of philosophical mathematics he admired.
Leibniz communicated his ideas of the binary system representing Christianity to the Emperor of China, hoping it would convert him.
Leibniz was one of the western philosophers of the time who attempted to accommodate Confucian ideas to prevailing European beliefs.
Leibniz's attraction to Chinese philosophy originates from his perception that Chinese philosophy was similar to his own.
The historian E.R.
Hughes suggests that Leibniz's ideas of "simple substance" and " pre-established harmony " were directly influenced by Confucianism, pointing to the fact that they were conceived during the period when he was reading Confucius Sinarum Philosophus .
Polymath   This section does not cite any sources .
( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  While making his grand tour of European archives to research the Brunswick family history that he never completed, Leibniz stopped in Vienna between May 1688 and February 1689, where he did much legal and diplomatic work for the Brunswicks.
He visited mines, talked with mine engineers, and tried to negotiate export contracts for lead from the ducal mines in the Harz mountains .
His proposal that the streets of Vienna be lit with lamps burning rapeseed oil was implemented.
During a formal audience with the Austrian Emperor and in subsequent memoranda, he advocated reorganizing the Austrian economy, reforming the coinage of much of central Europe, negotiating a Concordat between the Habsburgs and the Vatican , and creating an imperial research library, official archive, and public insurance fund.
He wrote and published an important paper on mechanics .
Posthumous reputation   Leibnizstrasse street sign Berlin  When Leibniz died, his reputation was in decline.
He was remembered for only one book, the Théodicée ,  whose supposed central argument Voltaire lampooned in his popular book Candide , which concludes with the character Candide saying, " Non liquet " (it is not clear), a term that was applied during the Roman Republic to a legal verdict of "not proven".
Voltaire's depiction of Leibniz's ideas was so influential that many believed it to be an accurate description.
Thus Voltaire and his Candide bear some of the blame for the lingering failure to appreciate and understand Leibniz's ideas.
Leibniz had an ardent disciple, Christian Wolff , whose dogmatic and facile outlook did Leibniz's reputation much harm.
Leibniz also influenced David Hume , who read his Théodicée and used some of his ideas.
In any event, philosophical fashion was moving away from the rationalism and system building of the 17th century, of which Leibniz had been such an ardent proponent.
His work on law, diplomacy, and history was seen as of ephemeral interest.
The vastness and richness of his correspondence went unrecognized.
Leibniz's reputation began to recover with the 1765 publication of the Nouveaux Essais .
In 1768, Louis Dutens edited the first multi-volume edition of Leibniz's writings, followed in the 19th century by a number of editions, including those edited by Erdmann, Foucher de Careil, Gerhardt, Gerland, Klopp, and Mollat.
Publication of Leibniz's correspondence with notables such as Antoine Arnauld , Samuel Clarke , Sophia of Hanover , and her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover , began.
In 1900, Bertrand Russell published a critical study of Leibniz's metaphysics .
Shortly thereafter, Louis Couturat published an important study of Leibniz, and edited a volume of Leibniz's heretofore unpublished writings, mainly on logic.
They made Leibniz somewhat respectable among 20th-century analytical and linguistic philosophers in the English-speaking world (Leibniz had already been of great influence to many Germans such as Bernhard Riemann ).
For example, Leibniz's phrase salva veritate , meaning interchangeability without loss of or compromising the truth, recurs in Willard Quine 's writings.
Nevertheless, the secondary literature on Leibniz did not really blossom until after World War II.
This is especially true of English speaking countries; in Gregory Brown's bibliography fewer than 30 of the English language entries were published before 1946.
American Leibniz studies owe much to Leroy Loemker (1904–1985) through his translations and his interpretive essays in LeClerc (1973).
Leibniz's philosophy was also highly regarded by Gilles Deleuze,  who in 1988 published The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque , an important part of Deleuze's own corpus.
Nicholas Jolley has surmised that Leibniz's reputation as a philosopher is now perhaps higher than at any time since he was alive.
Analytic and contemporary philosophy continue to invoke his notions of identity , individuation , and possible worlds .
Work in the history of 17th- and 18th-century ideas has revealed more clearly the 17th-century "Intellectual Revolution" that preceded the better-known Industrial and commercial revolutions of the 18th and 19th centuries.
In Germany, various important institutions were named after Leibniz.
In Hanover in particular, he is the namesake for some of the most important institutions in the town:  Leibniz University Hannover  Leibniz-Akademie , Institution for academic and non-academic training and further education in the business sector  Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek – Niedersächsische Landesbibliothek , one of the largest regional and academic libraries in Germany and, alongside the Oldenburg State Library and the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, one of the three state libraries in Lower Saxony  Gottfried-Wilhelm-Leibniz-Gesellschaft , Society for the cultivation and dissemination of Leibniz's teachings  outside of Hanover:  Leibniz Association , Berlin  Leibniz-Sozietät der Wissenschaften zu Berlin , Association of scientists founded in Berlin in 1993 with the legal form of a registered association; It continues the activities of the Academy of Sciences of the GDR with personnel continuity  Leibniz Kolleg of Tübingen University , central propaedeutic institution of the university, which aims to enable high school graduates to make a well-founded study decision through a ten-month, comprehensive general course of study and at the same time to introduce them to academic work  Leibniz Supercomputing Centre , Munich  more than 20 schools all over Germany  Awards:  Leibniz-Ring-Hannover , Honor given since 1997 by the Hannover Press Club to personalities or institutions “who have drawn attention to themselves through an outstanding performance or have made a special mark through their life’s work.”  Leibniz-Medaille of the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities , established in 1906 and awarded previously by the Prussian Academy of Sciences and later the German Academy of Sciences at Berlin  Gottfried-Wilhelm-Leibniz-Medaille of the Leibniz-Sozietät  Leibniz-Medaille der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz  In 1985, the German government created the Leibniz Prize , offering an annual award of 1.55 million euros for experimental results and 770,000 euros for theoretical ones.
It was the world's largest prize for scientific achievement prior to the Fundamental Physics Prize .
The collection of manuscript papers of Leibniz at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek – Niedersächische Landesbibliothek was inscribed on UNESCO 's Memory of the World Register in 2007.
Cultural references   Leibniz still receives popular attention.
The Google Doodle for 1 July 2018 celebrated Leibniz's 372nd birthday.
Using a quill , his hand is shown writing "Google" in binary ASCII code.
One of the earliest popular but indirect expositions of Leibniz was Voltaire 's satire Candide , published in 1759.
Leibniz was lampooned as Professor Pangloss, described as "the greatest philosopher of the Holy Roman Empire ".
Leibniz also appears as one of the main historical figures in Neal Stephenson 's series of novels The Baroque Cycle .
Stephenson credits readings and discussions concerning Leibniz for inspiring him to write the series.
Leibniz also stars in Adam Ehrlich Sachs's novel The Organs of Sense .
The German biscuit Choco Leibniz is named after Leibniz, a famous resident of Hanover where the manufacturer Bahlsen is based.
Writings and publication   Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, c.
1710  Leibniz mainly wrote in three languages: scholastic Latin , French and German.
During his lifetime, he published many pamphlets and scholarly articles, but only two "philosophical" books, the Combinatorial Art and the Théodicée .
(He published numerous pamphlets, often anonymous, on behalf of the House of Brunswick-Lüneburg , most notably the "De jure suprematum" a major consideration of the nature of sovereignty .)
One substantial book appeared posthumously, his Nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humain , which Leibniz had withheld from publication after the death of John Locke .
Only in 1895, when Bodemann completed his catalogue of Leibniz's manuscripts and correspondence, did the enormous extent of Leibniz's Nachlass become clear: about 15,000 letters to more than 1000 recipients plus more than 40,000 other items.
Moreover, quite a few of these letters are of essay length.
Much of his vast correspondence, especially the letters dated after 1700, remains unpublished, and much of what is published has appeared only in recent decades.
The more than 67,000 records of the Leibniz Edition's Catalogue cover almost all of his known writings and the letters from him and to him.
The amount, variety, and disorder of Leibniz's writings are a predictable result of a situation he described in a letter as follows:  I cannot tell you how extraordinarily distracted and spread out I am.
I am trying to find various things in the archives; I look at old papers and hunt up unpublished documents.
From these I hope to shed some light on the history of the  Brunswick.
I receive and answer a huge number of letters.
At the same time, I have so many mathematical results, philosophical thoughts, and other literary innovations that should not be allowed to vanish that I often do not know where to begin.
The extant parts of the critical edition  of Leibniz's writings are organized as follows:  Series 1.
Political, Historical, and General Correspondence .
25 vols., 1666–1706.
Series 2.
Philosophical Correspondence .
3 vols., 1663–1700.
Series 3.
Mathematical, Scientific, and Technical Correspondence .
8 vols., 1672–1698.
Series 4.
Political Writings .
9 vols., 1667–1702.
Series 5.
Historical and Linguistic Writings .
In preparation.
Series 6.
Philosophical Writings .
7 vols., 1663–90, and Nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humain .
Series 7.
Mathematical Writings .
6 vols., 1672–76.
Series 8.
Scientific, Medical, and Technical Writings .
1 vol., 1668–76.
The systematic cataloguing of all of Leibniz's Nachlass began in 1901.
It was hampered by two world wars and then by decades of German division into two states with the Cold War's "iron curtain" in between, separating scholars, and also scattering portions of his literary estates.
The ambitious project has had to deal with writings in seven languages, contained in some 200,000 written and printed pages.
In 1985 it was reorganized and included in a joint program of German federal and state ( Länder ) academies.
Since then the branches in Potsdam , Münster , Hanover and Berlin have jointly published 57 volumes of the critical edition, with an average of 870 pages, and prepared index and concordance works.
Selected works   The year given is usually that in which the work was completed, not of its eventual publication.
1666 (publ.
1690).
De Arte Combinatoria ( On the Art of Combination ); partially translated in Loemker §1 and Parkinson (1966)  1667.
Nova Methodus Discendae Docendaeque Iurisprudentiae ( A New Method for Learning and Teaching Jurisprudence )  1667.
"Dialogus de connexione inter res et verba"  1671.
Hypothesis Physica Nova ( New Physical Hypothesis ); Loemker §8.I (part)  1673 Confessio philosophi ( A Philosopher's Creed ); an English translation is available online.
Oct.
1684.
"Meditationes de cognitione, veritate et ideis" ("Meditations on Knowledge, Truth, and Ideas")  Nov.
1684.
"
Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis " ("New method for maximums and minimums"); translated in Struik, D.
J., 1969.
A Source Book in Mathematics, 1200–1800 .
Harvard University Press: 271–81.
1686.
Discours de métaphysique ; Martin and Brown (1988), Ariew and Garber 35, Loemker §35, Wiener III.3, Woolhouse and Francks 1  1686.
Generales inquisitiones de analysi notionum et veritatum ( General Inquiries About the Analysis of Concepts and of Truths )  1694.
"De primae philosophiae Emendatione, et de Notione Substantiae" ("On the Correction of First Philosophy and the Notion of Substance")  1695.
Système nouveau de la nature et de la communication des substances ( New System of Nature )  1700.
Accessiones historicae   1703.
"Explication de l'Arithmétique Binaire" ("Explanation of Binary Arithmetic"); Carl Immanuel Gerhardt, Mathematical Writings VII.223.
An English translation by Lloyd Strickland is available online.
1704 (publ.
1765).
Nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humain .
Translated in: Remnant, Peter, and Bennett, Jonathan, trans., 1996.
New Essays on Human Understanding Langley translation 1896.
Wiener III.6 (part)  1707–1710.
Scriptores rerum Brunsvicensium  (3 Vols.)
1710.
Théodicée ; Farrer, A.
M., and Huggard, E.
M., trans., 1985 (1952).
Wiener III.11 (part).
An English translation is available online at Project Gutenberg .
1714.
"Principes de la nature et de la Grâce fondés en raison"  1714.
Monadologie ; translated by Nicholas Rescher , 1991.
The Monadology: An Edition for Students .
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Ariew and Garber 213, Loemker §67, Wiener III.13, Woolhouse and Francks 19.
An English translation by Robert Latta is available online.
Posthumous works   Commercium philosophicum et mathematicum (1745), a collection of letters between Leibnitz and Johann Bernoulli  1717.
Collectanea Etymologica , edited by the secretary of Leibniz Johann Georg von Eckhart  1749.
Protogaea  1750.
Origines Guelficae   Collections   Six important collections of English translations are Wiener (1951), Parkinson (1966), Loemker (1969), Ariew and Garber (1989), Woolhouse and Francks (1998), and Strickland (2006).
The ongoing critical edition of all of Leibniz's writings is Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe .
German philosopher, logician, and mathematician (1848–1925)  "Frege" redirects here.
For other people with the surname, see Frege (surname) .
Not to be confused with Gottlob Frick .
Gottlob Frege Frege in c.
1879 Born 8 November 1848 Wismar , Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin , German Confederation Died 26 July 1925 (1925-07-26) (aged 76) Bad Kleinen , Free State of Mecklenburg-Schwerin , German Reich Education University of Göttingen ( PhD , 1873) University of Jena ( Dr. phil.
, 1874) Notable work Begriffsschrift (1879) The Foundations of Arithmetic (1884) Basic Laws of Arithmetic (1893–1903) Era 19th-century philosophy 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Linguistic turn Logical objectivism Modern Platonism  Logicism Transcendental idealism   (before 1891) Metaphysical realism  (after 1891) Foundationalism  Indirect realism  Redundancy theory of truth  Institutions University of Jena Theses  Ueber eine geometrische Darstellung der imaginären Gebilde in der Ebene (On a Geometrical Representation of Imaginary Forms in a Plane) (1873)  Rechnungsmethoden, die sich auf eine Erweiterung des Größenbegriffes gründen (Methods of Calculation based on an Extension of the Concept of Magnitude) (1874)  Doctoral advisor Ernst Christian Julius Schering (PhD thesis advisor) Other academic advisors Rudolf Friedrich Alfred Clebsch Notable students Rudolf Carnap Main interests Philosophy of mathematics , mathematical logic , philosophy of language Notable ideas     Anti-psychologism principle of compositionality context principle quantification theory predicate calculus Frege's propositional calculus ancestral relation logicism sense and reference Frege's puzzles concept and object  sortal Third Realm mediated reference theory (Frege–Russell view) descriptivist theory of names  redundancy theory of truth ,   set-theoretic definition of natural numbers Hume's principle Basic Law V Frege's theorem Frege–Church ontology Frege–Geach problem law of trichotomy technique for binding arguments   round square copula      Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege ( / ˈ f r eɪ ɡ ə / ;   German:   ; 8 November 1848 – 26 July 1925) was a German philosopher, logician, and mathematician.
He was a mathematics professor at the University of Jena , and is understood by many to be the father of analytic philosophy , concentrating on the philosophy of language , logic , and mathematics .
Though he was largely ignored during his lifetime, Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932), Bertrand Russell (1872–1970), and, to some extent, Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) introduced his work to later generations of philosophers.
Frege is widely considered to be the greatest logician since Aristotle , and one of the most profound philosophers of mathematics ever.
His contributions include the development of modern logic in the Begriffsschrift and work in the foundations of mathematics .
His book the Foundations of Arithmetic is the seminal text of the logicist project, and is cited by Michael Dummett as where to pinpoint the linguistic turn .
His philosophical papers " On Sense and Reference " and "The Thought" are also widely cited.
The former argues for two different types of meaning and descriptivism .
In Foundations and "The Thought", Frege argues for Platonism against psychologism or formalism , concerning numbers and propositions respectively.
Life   Childhood (1848–69)   Frege was born in 1848 in Wismar , Mecklenburg-Schwerin (today part of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern ).
His father Carl (Karl) Alexander Frege (1809–1866) was the co-founder and headmaster of a girls' high school until his death.
After Carl's death, the school was led by Frege's mother Auguste Wilhelmine Sophie Frege (née Bialloblotzky, 12 January 1815 – 14 October 1898); her mother was Auguste Amalia Maria Ballhorn, a descendant of Philipp Melanchthon  and her father was Johann Heinrich Siegfried Bialloblotzky, a descendant of a Polish noble family who left Poland in the 17th century.
Frege was a Lutheran.
In childhood, Frege encountered philosophies that would guide his future scientific career.
For example, his father wrote a textbook on the German language for children aged 9–13, entitled Hülfsbuch zum Unterrichte in der deutschen Sprache für Kinder von 9 bis 13 Jahren (2nd ed., Wismar 1850; 3rd ed., Wismar and Ludwigslust: Hinstorff, 1862) (Help book for teaching German to children from 9 to 13 years old), the first section of which dealt with the structure and logic of language .
Frege studied at Große Stadtschule Wismar  and graduated in 1869.
His teacher Gustav Adolf Leo Sachse (5 November 1843 – 1 September 1909), who was a poet, played the most important role in determining Frege's future scientific career, encouraging him to continue his studies at the University of Jena .
Studies at University (1869–74)   Frege matriculated at the University of Jena in the spring of 1869 as a citizen of the North German Confederation .
In the four semesters of his studies he attended approximately twenty courses of lectures, most of them on mathematics and physics.
His most important teacher was Ernst Karl Abbe (1840–1905; physicist, mathematician, and inventor).
Abbe gave lectures on theory of gravity, galvanism and electrodynamics, complex analysis theory of functions of a complex variable, applications of physics, selected divisions of mechanics, and mechanics of solids.
Abbe was more than a teacher to Frege: he was a trusted friend, and, as director of the optical manufacturer Carl Zeiss AG, he was in a position to advance Frege's career.
After Frege's graduation, they came into closer correspondence.
His other notable university teachers were Christian Philipp Karl Snell (1806–86; subjects: use of infinitesimal analysis in geometry, analytic geometry of planes , analytical mechanics, optics, physical foundations of mechanics); Hermann Karl Julius Traugott Schaeffer (1824–1900; analytic geometry, applied physics, algebraic analysis, on the telegraph and other electronic machines ); and the philosopher Kuno Fischer (1824–1907; Kantian and critical philosophy ).
Starting in 1871, Frege continued his studies in Göttingen, the leading university in mathematics in German-speaking territories, where he attended the lectures of Rudolf Friedrich Alfred Clebsch (1833–72; analytic geometry), Ernst Christian Julius Schering (1824–97; function theory), Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1804–91; physical studies, applied physics), Eduard Riecke (1845–1915; theory of electricity), and Hermann Lotze (1817–81; philosophy of religion).
Many of the philosophical doctrines of the mature Frege have parallels in Lotze; it has been the subject of scholarly debate whether or not there was a direct influence on Frege's views arising from his attending Lotze's lectures.
In 1873, Frege attained his doctorate under Ernst Christian Julius Schering, with a dissertation under the title of "Ueber eine geometrische Darstellung der imaginären Gebilde in der Ebene" ("On a Geometrical Representation of Imaginary Forms in a Plane"), in which he aimed to solve such fundamental problems in geometry as the mathematical interpretation of projective geometry 's infinitely distant (imaginary) points.
Frege married Margarete Katharina Sophia Anna Lieseberg (15 February 1856 – 25 June 1904) on 14 March 1887.
The couple had at least two children, who unfortunately died when young.
Years later they adopted a son, Alfred.
Little else is known about Frege's family life, however.
Work as a logician   Main article: Begriffsschrift  Though his education and early mathematical work focused primarily on geometry, Frege's work soon turned to logic.
His Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens , Halle a/S: Verlag von Louis Nebert, 1879 marked a turning point in the history of logic.
The Begriffsschrift broke new ground, including a rigorous treatment of the ideas of functions and variables .
Frege's goal was to show that mathematics grows out of logic , and in so doing, he devised techniques that separated him from the Aristotelian syllogistic but took him rather close to Stoic propositional logic.
Title page to Begriffsschrift (1879) In effect, Frege invented axiomatic  predicate logic , in large part thanks to his invention of quantified variables , which eventually became ubiquitous in mathematics and logic, and which solved the problem of multiple generality .
Previous logic had dealt with the logical constants  and , or , if...
then...
, not , and some and all , but iterations of these operations, especially "some" and "all", were little understood: even the distinction between a sentence like "every boy loves some girl" and "some girl is loved by every boy" could be represented only very artificially, whereas Frege's formalism had no difficulty expressing the different readings of "every boy loves some girl who loves some boy who loves some girl" and similar sentences, in complete parallel with his treatment of, say, "every boy is foolish".
A frequently noted example is that Aristotle's logic is unable to represent mathematical statements like Euclid's theorem , a fundamental statement of number theory that there are an infinite number of prime numbers .
Frege's "conceptual notation", however, can represent such inferences.
The analysis of logical concepts and the machinery of formalization that is essential to Principia Mathematica (3 vols., 1910–13, by Bertrand Russell , 1872–1970, and Alfred North Whitehead , 1861–1947), to Russell's theory of descriptions , to Kurt Gödel 's (1906–78) incompleteness theorems , and to Alfred Tarski 's (1901–83) theory of truth, is ultimately due to Frege.
One of Frege's stated purposes was to isolate genuinely logical principles of inference, so that in the proper representation of mathematical proof, one would at no point appeal to "intuition".
If there was an intuitive element, it was to be isolated and represented separately as an axiom: from there on, the proof was to be purely logical and without gaps.
Having exhibited this possibility, Frege's larger purpose was to defend the view that arithmetic is a branch of logic, a view known as logicism : unlike geometry, arithmetic was to be shown to have no basis in "intuition", and no need for non-logical axioms.
Already in the 1879 Begriffsschrift important preliminary theorems, for example, a generalized form of law of trichotomy , were derived within what Frege understood to be pure logic.
This idea was formulated in non-symbolic terms in his The Foundations of Arithmetic ( Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik , 1884).
Later, in his Basic Laws of Arithmetic ( Grundgesetze der Arithmetik , vol.
1, 1893; vol.
2, 1903; vol.
2 was published at his own expense), Frege attempted to derive, by use of his symbolism, all of the laws of arithmetic from axioms he asserted as logical.
Most of these axioms were carried over from his Begriffsschrift , though not without some significant changes.
The one truly new principle was one he called the Basic Law V : the "value-range" of the function f ( x ) is the same as the "value-range" of the function g ( x ) if and only if ∀ x .
The crucial case of the law may be formulated in modern notation as follows.
Let { x | Fx } denote the extension of the predicate  Fx , that is, the set of all Fs, and similarly for Gx .
Then Basic Law V says that the predicates Fx and Gx have the same extension if and only if ∀x.
The set of Fs is the same as the set of Gs just in case every F is a G and every G is an F.
(The case is special because what is here being called the extension of a predicate, or a set, is only one type of "value-range" of a function.)
In a famous episode, Bertrand Russell wrote to Frege, just as Vol.
2 of the Grundgesetze was about to go to press in 1903, showing that Russell's paradox could be derived from Frege's Basic Law V.
It is easy to define the relation of membership of a set or extension in Frege's system; Russell then drew attention to "the set of things x that are such that x is not a member of x ".
The system of the Grundgesetze entails that the set thus characterised both is and is not a member of itself, and is thus inconsistent.
Frege wrote a hasty, last-minute Appendix to Vol.
2, deriving the contradiction and proposing to eliminate it by modifying Basic Law V.
Frege opened the Appendix with the exceptionally honest comment: "Hardly anything more unfortunate can befall a scientific writer than to have one of the foundations of his edifice shaken after the work is finished.
This was the position I was placed in by a letter of Mr. Bertrand Russell, just when the printing of this volume was nearing its completion."
(This letter and Frege's reply are translated in Jean van Heijenoort 1967.)
Frege's proposed remedy was subsequently shown to imply that there is but one object in the universe of discourse , and hence is worthless (indeed, this would make for a contradiction in Frege's system if he had axiomatized the idea, fundamental to his discussion, that the True and the False are distinct objects; see, for example, Dummett 1973), but recent work has shown that much of the program of the Grundgesetze might be salvaged in other ways:  Basic Law V can be weakened in other ways.
The best-known way is due to philosopher and mathematical logician George Boolos (1940–1996), who was an expert on the work of Frege.
A "concept" F is "small" if the objects falling under F cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with the universe of discourse, that is, unless: ∃ R .
Now weaken V to V*: a "concept" F and a "concept" G have the same "extension" if and only if neither F nor G is small or ∀ x ( Fx ↔ Gx ).
V* is consistent if second-order arithmetic is, and suffices to prove the axioms of second-order arithmetic.
Basic Law V can simply be replaced with Hume's principle , which says that the number of F s is the same as the number of G s if and only if the F s can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the G s.
This principle, too, is consistent if second-order arithmetic is, and suffices to prove the axioms of second-order arithmetic.
This result is termed Frege's theorem because it was noticed that in developing arithmetic, Frege's use of Basic Law V is restricted to a proof of Hume's principle; it is from this, in turn, that arithmetical principles are derived.
On Hume's principle and Frege's theorem, see "Frege's Logic, Theorem, and Foundations for Arithmetic".
Frege's logic, now known as second-order logic , can be weakened to so-called predicative second-order logic.
Predicative second-order logic plus Basic Law V is provably consistent by finitistic or constructive methods, but it can interpret only very weak fragments of arithmetic.
Frege's work in logic had little international attention until 1903 when Russell wrote an appendix to The Principles of Mathematics stating his differences with Frege.
The diagrammatic notation that Frege used had no antecedents (and has had no imitators since).
Moreover, until Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica (3 vols.)
appeared in 1910–13, the dominant approach to mathematical logic was still that of George Boole (1815–64) and his intellectual descendants, especially Ernst Schröder (1841–1902).
Frege's logical ideas nevertheless spread through the writings of his student Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970) and other admirers, particularly Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951).
Philosopher   Frege, c.
1905  Frege is one of the founders of analytic philosophy , whose work on logic and language gave rise to the linguistic turn in philosophy.
His contributions to the philosophy of language include:  Function and argument analysis of the proposition ;  Distinction between concept and object ( Begriff und Gegenstand );  Principle of compositionality ;  Context principle ; and  Distinction between the sense and reference ( Sinn und Bedeutung ) of names and other expressions, sometimes said to involve a mediated reference theory .
As a philosopher of mathematics, Frege attacked the psychologistic appeal to mental explanations of the content of judgment of the meaning of sentences.
His original purpose was very far from answering general questions about meaning; instead, he devised his logic to explore the foundations of arithmetic, undertaking to answer questions such as "What is a number?"
or "What objects do number-words ('one', 'two', etc.)
refer to?"
But in pursuing these matters, he eventually found himself analysing and explaining what meaning is, and thus came to several conclusions that proved highly consequential for the subsequent course of analytic philosophy and the philosophy of language.
Sense and reference   Main article: Sense and reference  Frege's 1892 paper, " On Sense and Reference " ("Über Sinn und Bedeutung"), introduced his influential distinction between sense ("Sinn") and reference ("Bedeutung", which has also been translated as "meaning", or "denotation").
While conventional accounts of meaning took expressions to have just one feature (reference), Frege introduced the view that expressions have two different aspects of significance: their sense and their reference.
Reference (or "Bedeutung") applied to proper names , where a given expression (say the expression "Tom") simply refers to the entity bearing the name (the person named Tom).
Frege also held that propositions had a referential relationship with their truth-value (in other words, a statement "refers" to the truth-value it takes).
By contrast, the sense (or "Sinn") associated with a complete sentence is the thought it expresses.
The sense of an expression is said to be the "mode of presentation" of the item referred to, and there can be multiple modes of representation for the same referent.
The distinction can be illustrated thus: In their ordinary uses, the name "Charles Philip Arthur George Mountbatten-Windsor", which for logical purposes is an unanalysable whole, and the functional expression "the King of the United Kingdom", which contains the significant parts "the King of ξ" and "United Kingdom", have the same referent , namely, the person best known as King Charles III .
But the sense of the word " United Kingdom " is a part of the sense of the latter expression, but no part of the sense of the "full name" of King Charles.
These distinctions were disputed by Bertrand Russell, especially in his paper " On Denoting "; the controversy has continued into the present, fueled especially by Saul Kripke 's famous lectures " Naming and Necessity ".
1924 diary   Frege's published philosophical writings were of a very technical nature and divorced from practical issues, so much so that Frege scholar Dummett expressed his "shock to discover, while reading Frege's diary, that his hero was an anti-Semite."
After the German Revolution of 1918–19 his political opinions became more radical.
In the last year of his life, at the age of 76, his diary contained political opinions opposing the parliamentary system, democrats, liberals, Catholics, the French and Jews, who he thought ought to be deprived of political rights and, preferably, expelled from Germany.
Frege confided "that he had once thought of himself as a liberal and was an admirer of Bismarck ", but then sympathized with General Ludendorff .
In an entry dated 5 May 1924 Frege expressed agreement with an article published in Houston Stewart Chamberlain's  Deutschlands Erneuerung which praised Adolf Hitler .
Frege recorded the belief that it would be best if the Jews of Germany would "get lost, or better would like to disappear from Germany."
Some interpretations have been written about that time.
The diary contains a critique of universal suffrage and socialism.
Frege had friendly relations with Jews in real life: among his students was Gershom Scholem ,   who greatly valued his teaching, and it was he who encouraged Ludwig Wittgenstein to leave for England in order to study with Bertrand Russell .
The 1924 diary was published posthumously in 1994.
Frege apparently never spoke in public about his political viewpoints.
Personality   Frege was described by his students as a highly introverted person, seldom entering into dialogues with others and mostly facing the blackboard while lecturing.
He was, however, known to occasionally show wit and even bitter sarcasm during his classes.
Important dates   Born 8 November 1848 in Wismar , Mecklenburg-Schwerin .
1869 — attends the University of Jena .
1871 — attends the University of Göttingen .
1873 — PhD, doctor in mathematics ( geometry ), attained at Göttingen.
1874 — Habilitation at Jena; private teacher .
1879 — Ausserordentlicher Professor at Jena.
1896 — Ordentlicher Honorarprofessor at Jena.
1918 — retires.
Died 26 July 1925 in Bad Kleinen (now part of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern ).
Important works   Logic, foundation of arithmetic   Begriffsschrift: eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens (1879), Halle an der Saale: Verlag von Louis Nebert ( online version ).
In English: Begriffsschrift, a Formula Language, Modeled Upon That of Arithmetic, for Pure Thought , in: J.
van Heijenoort (ed.
), From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931 , Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967, pp.
5–82.
In English (selected sections revised in modern formal notation): R.
L.
Mendelsohn, The Philosophy of Gottlob Frege , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005: "Appendix A.
Begriffsschrift in Modern Notation: (1) to (51)" and "Appendix B.
Begriffsschrift in Modern Notation: (52) to (68)."
Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: Eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung über den Begriff der Zahl (1884), Breslau: Verlag von Wilhelm Koebner ( online version ).
In English: The Foundations of Arithmetic : A Logico-Mathematical Enquiry into the Concept of Number , translated by J.
L.
Austin , Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1950.
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik , Band I (1893); Band II (1903), Jena: Verlag Hermann Pohle ( online version) .
In English (translation of selected sections), "Translation of Part of Frege's Grundgesetze der Arithmetik ," translated and edited Peter Geach and Max Black in Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege , New York, NY: Philosophical Library, 1952, pp.
137–158.
In German (revised in modern formal notation): Grundgesetze der Arithmetik , Korpora (portal of the University of Duisburg-Essen ), 2006: Band I  Archived 21 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine and Band II  Archived 29 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine .
In German (revised in modern formal notation): Grundgesetze der Arithmetik – Begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet.
Band I und II: In moderne Formelnotation transkribiert und mit einem ausführlichen Sachregister versehen , edited by T.
Müller, B.
Schröder, and R.
Stuhlmann-Laeisz, Paderborn: mentis, 2009.
In English: Basic Laws of Arithmetic , translated and edited with an introduction by Philip A.
Ebert and Marcus Rossberg.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
ISBN  978-0-19-928174-9 .
Philosophical studies   " Function and Concept " (1891)  Original: "Funktion und Begriff", an address to the Jenaische Gesellschaft für Medizin und Naturwissenschaft, Jena, 9 January 1891.
In English: "Function and Concept".
 "
On Sense and Reference " (1892)  Original: "Über Sinn und Bedeutung", in Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik C (1892): 25–50.
In English: "On Sense and Reference", alternatively translated (in later edition) as "On Sense and Meaning".
 "
Concept and Object " (1892)  Original: "Ueber Begriff und Gegenstand", in Vierteljahresschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie XVI (1892): 192–205.
In English: "Concept and Object".
"What is a Function?"
(1904)  Original: "Was ist eine Funktion?
", in Festschrift Ludwig Boltzmann gewidmet zum sechzigsten Geburtstage, 20 February 1904 , S.
Meyer (ed.
), Leipzig, 1904, pp.
656–666.
In English: "What is a Function?".
Logical Investigations (1918–1923).
Frege intended that the following three papers be published together in a book titled Logische Untersuchungen ( Logical Investigations ).
Though the German book never appeared, the papers were published together in Logische Untersuchungen , ed.
G.
Patzig, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1966, and English translations appeared together in Logical Investigations , ed.
Peter Geach, Blackwell, 1975.
1918–19.
"Der Gedanke: Eine logische Untersuchung" ("The Thought: A Logical Inquiry"), in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus I :  58–77.
"Die Verneinung" ("Negation") in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus I : 143–157.
1923.
"Gedankengefüge" ("Compound Thought"), in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus III : 36–51.
Articles on geometry   1903: "Über die Grundlagen der Geometrie".
Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung XII (1903), 368–375.
In English: "On the Foundations of Geometry".
1967: Kleine Schriften .
(I.
Angelelli, ed.).
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1967 and Hildesheim, G.
Olms, 1967.
"Small Writings," a collection of most of his writings (e.g., the previous), posthumously published.
German-American philosopher (1891–1970)  "Carnap" redirects here.
For the crime, see Carnapping .
Rudolf Carnap Rudolf Carnap, 1935, by Francis Schmidt Born ( 1891-05-18 ) 18 May 1891 Ronsdorf , Lennep , Düsseldorf , Rhine , Prussia , German Empire Died 14 September 1970 (1970-09-14) (aged 79) Santa Monica, California , U.S. Education University of Jena (B.A., 1914; PhD, 1921) University of Freiburg ( audit student , 1911–12)  University of Berlin ( graduate research , 1917–18)  University of Vienna (Dr. phil.
hab., 1926) Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Nominalism  Vienna Circle Logical positivism Logical atomism  Logical behaviorism  Formalism in the philosophy of mathematics Institutions University of Vienna University of Chicago Institute for Advanced Study UCLA Theses  Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre (Space: A Contribution to the Theory of Science) (1921)  Der logische Aufbau der Welt (The Logical Structure of the World) (1926)  Doctoral advisor Bruno Bauch (Ph.D. advisor)  Moritz Schlick (Dr. phil.
hab.)
Other academic advisors Gottlob Frege Heinrich Rickert  Doctoral students Abner Shimony David Kaplan Other notable students Carl Gustav Hempel Peter G.
Ossorio Herbert A.
Simon Raymond Smullyan Yehoshua Bar-Hillel Main interests Logic  ·  Epistemology Philosophy of science Semantics Notable ideas  List   Physicalism  Phenomenalism in linguistic terms Logical behaviorism  Extensionalism Analytic–synthetic distinction (revised) Internal–external distinction Confirmationism Constitution theory Semantics for modal logic Inductive logic Constructed systems Conceptual schemes Formal epistemology Framework-relative constitutive  a priori  Intension and extension Functor  Beobachtungssatz ( observational statement ) Carnap's categoricity ( Monomorphie )  problem Forkability theorem ( Gabelbarkeitssatz ): "every complete axiom system is also categorical ( monomorph )"    Logical positivism Epistemic structural realism  L-true ( logically true ) statements  Intensional semantics evaluating formulas in state-descriptions  Carnap sentences  Three kinds of space: formal, physical and perceptual Elimination of metaphysics through logical analysis  Omega-rule  General self-referential lemma Carnapian (concept) explication  Principle of tolerance  Compatibilism       Rudolf Carnap ( / ˈ k ɑːr n æ p / ;   German:   ; 18 May 1891 – 14 September 1970) was a German-language philosopher who was active in Europe before 1935 and in the United States thereafter.
He was a major member of the Vienna Circle and an advocate of logical positivism .
Biography   Carnap's birthplace in Wuppertal  Carnap's father had risen from being a poor ribbon-weaver to be the owner of a ribbon-making factory.
His mother came from an academic family; her father was an educational reformer and her oldest brother was the archaeologist  Wilhelm Dörpfeld .
As a ten-year-old, Carnap accompanied Wilhelm Dörpfeld on an expedition to Greece.
Carnap was raised in a profoundly religious Protestant family, but later became an atheist.
He began his formal education at the Barmen  Gymnasium and the Carolo-Alexandrinum  Gymnasium in Jena .
From 1910 to 1914, he attended the University of Jena , intending to write a thesis in physics .
He also intently studied Immanuel Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason during a course taught by Bruno Bauch , and was one of very few students to attend Gottlob Frege 's courses in mathematical logic .
During his university years he became enthralled with the German Youth Movement .
While Carnap held moral and political opposition to World War I , he felt obligated to serve in the German army.
After three years of service, he was given permission to study physics at the University of Berlin , 1917–18, where Albert Einstein was a newly appointed professor.
Carnap then attended the University of Jena , where he wrote a thesis defining an axiomatic theory of space and time .
The physics department said it was too philosophical, and Bruno Bauch of the philosophy department said it was pure physics.
Carnap then wrote another thesis in 1921, under Bauch's supervision,  on the theory of space in a more orthodox Kantian style, and published as Der Raum ( Space ) in a supplemental issue of Kant-Studien (1922).
Frege's course exposed him to Bertrand Russell 's work on logic and philosophy, which put a sense of the aims to his studies.
He accepted the effort to surpass traditional philosophy with logical innovations that inform the sciences.
He wrote a letter to Russell, who responded by copying by hand long passages from his Principia Mathematica for Carnap's benefit, as neither Carnap nor his university could afford a copy of this epochal work.
In 1924 and 1925, he attended seminars led by Edmund Husserl ,  the founder of phenomenology , and continued to write on physics from a logical positivist perspective.
Carnap discovered a kindred spirit when he met Hans Reichenbach at a 1923 conference.
Reichenbach introduced Carnap to Moritz Schlick , a professor at the University of Vienna who offered Carnap a position in his department, which Carnap accepted in 1926.
Carnap thereupon joined an informal group of Viennese intellectuals that came to be known as the Vienna Circle , directed largely by Schlick and including Hans Hahn , Friedrich Waismann , Otto Neurath , and Herbert Feigl , with occasional visits by Hahn's student Kurt Gödel .
When Wittgenstein visited Vienna, Carnap would meet with him.
He (with Hahn and Neurath) wrote the 1929 manifesto of the Circle, and (with Hans Reichenbach ) initiated the philosophy journal Erkenntnis .
In February 1930 Alfred Tarski lectured in Vienna, and during November 1930 Carnap visited Warsaw.
On these occasions he learned much about Tarski's model theoretic method of semantics .
Rose Rand , another philosopher in the Vienna Circle, noted, "Carnap's conception of semantics starts from the basis given in Tarski's work but a distinction is made between logical and non-logical constants and between logical and factual truth...
At the same time he worked with the concepts of intension and extension and took these two concepts as a basis of a new method of semantics."
In 1931, Carnap was appointed Professor at the German University of Prague .
In 1933, W.
V.
Quine met Carnap in Prague and discussed the latter's work at some length.
Thus began the lifelong mutual respect these two men shared, one that survived Quine's eventual forceful disagreements with a number of Carnap's philosophical conclusions.
Carnap, whose socialist and pacifist beliefs put him at risk in Nazi Germany , emigrated to the United States in 1935 and became a naturalized citizen in 1941.
Meanwhile, back in Vienna, Schlick was murdered in 1936.
From 1936 to 1952, Carnap was a professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago .
During the late 1930s, Carnap offered an assistant position in philosophy to Carl Gustav Hempel , who accepted and became one of his most significant intellectual collaborators.
Thanks partly to Quine's help, Carnap spent the years 1939–41 at Harvard University , where he was reunited with Tarski.
Carnap (1963) later expressed some irritation about his time at Chicago, where he and Charles W.
Morris were the only members of the department committed to the primacy of science and logic.
(Their Chicago colleagues included Richard McKeon , Charles Hartshorne , and Manley Thompson.)
Carnap's years at Chicago were nonetheless very productive ones.
He wrote books on semantics (Carnap 1942, 1943, 1956), modal logic , and on the philosophical foundations of probability and inductive logic (Carnap 1950, 1952).
After a stint at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (1952–1954), he joined the UCLA  Department of Philosophy in 1954, Hans Reichenbach having died the previous year.
He had earlier refused an offer of a similar job at the University of California, Berkeley , because accepting that position required that he sign a loyalty oath , a practice to which he was opposed on principle.
While at UCLA, he wrote on scientific knowledge, the analytic–synthetic distinction , and the verification principle .
His writings on thermodynamics and on the foundations of probability and inductive logic , were published posthumously as Carnap (1971, 1977, 1980).
Carnap taught himself Esperanto when he was 14 years of age, and remained sympathetic to it (Carnap 1963).
He later attended the World Congress of Esperanto in 1908 and 1922, and employed the language while traveling.
Carnap had four children by his first marriage to Elizabeth Schöndube, which ended in divorce in 1929.
He married his second wife, Elizabeth Ina Stöger, in 1933.
Ina committed suicide in 1964.
Philosophical work   This section does not cite any sources .
( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Below is an examination of the main topics in the evolution of the philosophy of Rudolf Carnap.
It is not exhaustive, but it outlines Carnap's main works and contributions to modern epistemology and philosophy of logic .
Der Raum   From 1919 to 1921, Carnap worked on a doctoral thesis called Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre ( Space: A Contribution to the Theory of Science , 1922).
In this dissertation on the philosophical foundations of geometry , Carnap tried to provide a logical basis for a theory of space and time in physics .
Considering that Carnap was interested in pure mathematics , natural sciences and philosophy, his dissertation can be seen as an attempt to build a bridge between the different disciplines that are geometry, physics and philosophy.
For Carnap thought that in many instances those disciplines use the same concepts, but with totally different meanings.
The main objective of Carnap's dissertation was to show that the inconsistencies between theories concerning space only existed because philosophers, as well as mathematicians and scientists, were talking about different things while using the same "space" word.
Hence, Carnap characteristically argued that there had to be three separate notions of space.
"Formal" space is space in the sense of mathematics: it is an abstract system of relations.
"Intuitive" space is made of certain contents of intuition independent of single experiences.
"Physical" space is made of actual spatial facts given in experience.
The upshot is that those three kinds of "space" imply three different kinds of knowledge and thus three different kinds of investigations.
It is interesting to note that it is in this dissertation that the main themes of Carnap's philosophy appear, most importantly the idea that many philosophical contradictions appear because of a misuse of language, and a stress on the importance of distinguishing formal and material modes of speech.
Der Logische Aufbau der Welt   From 1922 to 1925, Carnap worked on a book which became one of his major works, namely Der logische Aufbau der Welt (translated as The Logical Structure of the World , 1967), which was accepted in 1926 as his habilitation thesis at the University of Vienna and published as a book in 1928.
That achievement has become a landmark in modern epistemology and can be read as a forceful statement of the philosophical thesis of logical positivism.
Indeed, the Aufbau suggests that epistemology, based on modern symbolic logic , is concerned with the logical analysis of scientific propositions, while science itself, based on experience, is the only source of knowledge of the external world, i.e.
the world outside the realm of human perception.
According to Carnap, philosophical propositions are statements about the language of science; they aren't true or false, but merely consist of definitions and conventions about the use of certain concepts.
In contrast, scientific propositions are factual statements about the external reality.
They are meaningful because they are based on the perceptions of the senses.
In other words, the truth or falsity of those propositions can be verified by testing their content with further observations.
In the Aufbau , Carnap wants to display the logical and conceptual structure with which all scientific (factual) statements can be organized.
Carnap gives the label " constitution theory " to this epistemic-logical project.
It is a constructive undertaking that systematizes scientific knowledge according to the notions of symbolic logic.
Accordingly, the purpose of this constitutional system is to identify and discern different classes of scientific concepts and to specify the logical relations that link them.
In the Aufbau, concepts are taken to denote objects, relations, properties, classes and states.
Carnap argues that all concepts must be ranked over a hierarchy.
In that hierarchy, all concepts are organized according to a fundamental arrangement where concepts can be reduced and converted to other basic ones.
Carnap explains that a concept can be reduced to another when all sentences containing the first concept can be transformed into sentences containing the other.
In other words, every scientific sentence should be translatable into another sentence such that the original terms have the same reference as the translated terms.
Most significantly, Carnap argues that the basis of this system is psychological.
Its content is the "immediately given", which is made of basic elements, namely perceptual experiences.
These basic elements consist of conscious psychological states of a single human subject.
In the end, Carnap argues that his constitutional project demonstrates the possibility of defining and uniting all scientific concepts in a single conceptual system on the basis of a few fundamental concepts.
Overcoming metaphysics   From 1928 to 1934, Carnap published papers ( Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie , 1928; translated as Pseudoproblems in Philosophy , 1967) in which he appears overtly skeptical of the aims and methods of metaphysics , i.e.
the traditional philosophy that finds its roots in mythical and religious thought.
Indeed, he discusses how, in many cases, metaphysics is made of meaningless discussions of pseudo-problems.
For Carnap, a pseudo-problem is a philosophical question which, on the surface, handles concepts that refer to our world while, in fact, these concepts do not actually denote real and attested objects.
In other words, these pseudo-problems concern statements that do not, in any way, have empirical implications.
They do not refer to states of affairs and the things they denote cannot be perceived.
Consequently, one of Carnap's main aim has been to redefine the purpose and method of philosophy.
According to him, philosophy should not aim at producing any knowledge transcending the knowledge of science.
In contrast, by analyzing the language and propositions of science, philosophers should define the logical foundations of scientific knowledge.
Using symbolic logic , they should explicate the concepts, methods and justificatory processes that exist in science.
Carnap believed that the difficulty with traditional philosophy lay in the use of concepts that are not useful for science.
For Carnap, the scientific legitimacy of these concepts was doubtful, because the sentences containing them do not express facts.
Indeed, a logical analysis of those sentences proves that they do not convey the meaning of states of affairs.
In other words, these sentences are meaningless.
Carnap explains that to be meaningful, a sentence should be factual.
It can be so, for one thing, by being based on experience, i.e.
by being formulated with words relating to direct observations.
For another, a sentence is factual if one can clearly state what are the observations that could confirm or disconfirm that sentence.
After all, Carnap presupposes a specific criterion of meaning, namely the Wittgenstein ian principle of verifiability.
Indeed, he requires, as a precondition of meaningfulness, that all sentences be verifiable, which implies that a sentence is meaningful only if there is a way to verify if it is true or false.
To verify a sentence, one needs to expound the empirical conditions and circumstances that would establish the truth of the sentence.
As a result, it is clear for Carnap that metaphysical sentences are meaningless.
They include concepts like "god", "soul" and "the absolute" that transcend experience and cannot be traced back or connected to direct observations.
Because those sentences cannot be verified in any way, Carnap suggests that science, as well as philosophy, should neither consider nor contain them.
The logical analysis of language   At that point in his career, Carnap attempted to develop a full theory of the logical structure of scientific language.
This theory, exposed in Logische Syntax der Sprache (1934; translated as The Logical Syntax of Language , 1937) gives the foundations to his idea that scientific language has a specific formal structure and that its signs are governed by the rules of deductive logic.
Moreover, the theory of logical syntax expounds a method with which one can talk about a language: it is a formal meta-theory about the pure forms of language.
In the end, because Carnap argues that philosophy aims at the logical analysis of the language of science and thus is the logic of science, the theory of the logical syntax can be considered as a definite language and a conceptual framework for philosophy.
The logical syntax of language is a formal theory.
It is not concerned with the contextualized meaning or the truth-value of sentences.
In contrast, it considers the general structure of a given language and explores the different structural relations that connect the elements of that language.
Hence, by explaining the different operations that allow specific transformations within the language, the theory is a systematic exposition of the rules that operate within that language.
In fact, the basic function of these rules is to provide the principles to safeguard coherence, to avoid contradictions and to deduce justified conclusions.
Carnap sees language as a calculus.
This calculus is a systematic arrangement of symbols and relations.
The symbols of the language are organized according to the class they belong to and it is through their combination that we can form sentences.
The relations are different conditions under which a sentence can be said to follow, or to be the consequence, of another sentence.
The definitions included in the calculus state the conditions under which a sentence can be considered of a certain type and how those sentences can be transformed.
We can see the logical syntax as a method of formal transformation, i.e.
a method for calculating and reasoning with symbols.
It is in the logical syntax that Carnap introduces his notable principle of tolerance.
This principle suggests that there is no moral in logic.
When it comes to using a language, there is no good or bad, fundamentally true or false.
In this perspective, the philosopher's task is not to bring authoritative interdicts prohibiting the use of certain concepts.
In contrast, philosophers should seek general agreements over the relevance of certain logical devices.
According to Carnap, those agreements are possible only through the detailed presentation of the meaning and use of the expressions of a language.
In other words, Carnap believes that every logical language is correct only if this language is supported by exact definitions and not by philosophical presumptions.
Carnap embraces a formal conventionalism.
That implies that formal languages are constructed and that everyone is free to choose the language it finds more suited to his purpose.
There should not be any controversy over which language is the correct language; what matters is agreeing over which language best suits a particular purpose.
Carnap explains that the choice of a language should be guided according to the security it provides against logical inconsistency.
Furthermore, practical elements like simplicity and fruitfulness in certain tasks influence the choice of a language.
Clearly enough, the principle of tolerance was a sophisticated device introduced by Carnap to dismiss any form of dogmatism in philosophy.
Inductive logic   After having considered problems in semantics, i.e.
the theory of the concepts of meaning and truth ( Foundations of Logic and Mathematics , 1939; Introduction to Semantics , 1942; Formalization of Logic , 1943), Carnap turned his attention to the subject of probability and inductive logic .
His views on that subject are for the most part exposed in Logical foundations of probability (1950) where Carnap aims to give a sound logical interpretation of probability.
Carnap thought that according to certain conditions, the concept of probability had to be interpreted as a purely logical concept.
In this view, probability is a basic concept anchored in all inductive inferences, whereby the conclusion of every inference that holds without deductive necessity is said be more or less likely to be the case.
In fact, Carnap claims that the problem of induction is a matter of finding a precise explanation of the logical relation that holds between a hypothesis and the evidence that supports it.
An inductive logic is thus based on the idea that probability is a logical relation between two types of statements: the hypothesis (conclusion) and the premises (evidence).
Accordingly, a theory of induction should explain how, by pure logical analysis, we can ascertain that certain evidence establishes a degree of confirmation strong enough to confirm a given hypothesis.
Carnap was convinced that there was a logical as well as an empirical dimension in science.
He believed that one had to isolate the experiential elements from the logical elements of a given body of knowledge.
Hence, the empirical concept of frequency used in statistics to describe the general features of certain phenomena can be distinguished from the analytical concepts of probability logic that merely describe logical relations between sentences.
For Carnap, the statistical and the logical concepts must be investigated separately.
Having insisted on this distinction, Carnap defines two concepts of probability.
The first one is logical and deals with the degree to which a given hypothesis is confirmed by a piece of evidence.
It is the degree of confirmation .
The second is empirical, and relates to the long run rate of one observable feature of nature relative to another.
It is the relative frequency.
Statements belonging to the second concepts are about reality and describe states of affairs.
They are empirical and, therefore, must be based on experimental procedures and the observation of relevant facts.
On the contrary, statements belonging to the first concept do not say anything about facts.
Their meaning can be grasped solely with an analysis of the signs they contain.
They are analytical sentences, i.e.
true by virtue of their logical meaning.
Even though these sentences could refer to states of affairs, their meaning is given by the symbols and relations they contain.
In other words, the probability of a conclusion is given by the logical relation it has to the evidence.
The evaluation of the degree of confirmation of a hypothesis is thus a problem of meaning analysis.
Clearly, the probability of a statement about relative frequency can be unknown; because it depends on the observation of certain phenomena, one may not possess the information needed to establish the value of that probability.
Consequently, the value of that statement can be confirmed only if it is corroborated with facts.
In contrast, the probability of a statement about the degree of confirmation could be unknown, in the sense that one may miss the correct logical method to evaluate its exact value.
But, such a statement can always receive a certain logical value, given the fact that this value only depends on the meaning of its symbols.
Primary source materials   The Rudolf Carnap Papers contain thousands of letters, notes and drafts, and diaries.
The majority of his papers were purchased from his daughter, Hanna Carnap-Thost in 1974, by the University of Pittsburgh, with subsequent further accessions.
Documents that contain financial, medical, and personal information are restricted.
These were written over his entire life and career.
Carnap used the mail regularly to discuss philosophical problems with hundreds of others.
The most notable were: Herbert Feigl, Carl Gustav Hempel, Felix Kaufmann, Otto Neurath, and Moritz Schlick.
Photographs are also part of the collection and were taken throughout his life.
Family pictures and photographs of his peers and colleagues are also stored in the collection.
Some of the correspondence is considered notable and consist of his student notes, his seminars with Frege, (describing the Begriffsschrift and the logic in mathematics).
Carnap's notes from Russell's seminar in Chicago, and notes he took from discussions with Tarski, Heisenberg, Quine, Hempel, Gödel, and Jeffrey are also part of the University of Pittsburgh Library System's Archives and Special Collections.
Digitized contents include:  Notes (old), 1958–1966   More than 1,000 pages of lecture outlines are preserved that cover the courses that Carnap taught in the United States, Prague, and Vienna.
Drafts of his published works and unpublished works are part of the collection.
Additional Carnap materials can be found throughout the Archives of Scientific Philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh.
Manuscript drafts and typescripts both for his published works and for many unpublished papers and books.
A partial listing include his first formulations of his Aufbau .
Much material is written in an older German shorthand, the Stolze-Schrey system.
He employed this writing system extensively beginning in his student days.
Some of the content has been digitized and is available through the finding aid .
The University of California also maintains a collection of Rudolf Carnap Papers.
Microfilm copies of his papers are maintained by the Philosophical Archives at the University of Konstanz in Germany.
Selected publications   1922.
Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre , Kant-Studien , Ergänzungshefte .
56 (his 1921 doctoral thesis , published as a monograph supplement to the Kant-Studien journal).
English translation:  "Space: A Contribution to the Theory of Science" (2005 draft), published version in: The Collected Works of Rudolf Carnap, Volume 1: Early Writings (2019) pp.
21–208 ISBN  978-0-19-874840-3   1926.
Physikalische Begriffsbildung .
Karlsruhe: Braun.
English translation : "Physical Concept Formation" (1992 draft), published version in: Collected Works (2019) pp.
339–440  1928.
Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie ( Pseudoproblems in Philosophy ).
Berlin: Weltkreis-Verlag.
1928.
Der Logische Aufbau der Welt (his habilitation thesis ).
Leipzig: Felix Meiner Verlag.
English translation: Rolf A.
George, 1967.
The Logical Structure of the World.
Pseudoproblems in Philosophy .
University of California Press.
ISBN  0-812-69523-2  1929.
Abriss der Logistik, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Relationstheorie und ihrer Anwendungen .
( Revised) English translation: Introduction to Symbolic Logic (1958)  1931.
"Überwindung der Metaphysik durch logische Analyse der Sprache"  (PDF) .
Erkenntnis .
2 : 219–241.
1931.
doi : 10.1007/BF02028153 .
S2CID  144658746 .
English translation: " The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language"  Pap, Arthur (trans.)
in: Ayer, A.J (ed.)
Logical Positivism (1965) pp.
60–81 ISBN  978-0029011300  1934.
Logische Syntax der Sprache .
English translation: 1937, The Logical Syntax of Language .
Kegan Paul.
1935.
Philosophy and Logical Syntax .
Bristol UK: Thoemmes.
Excerpt.
1939, Foundations of Logic and Mathematics in International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, Vol.
I, No.
University of Chicago Press.
1942.
Introduction to Semantics .
Harvard Uni.
1943.
Formalization of Logic .
1945.
"On Inductive Logic" in Philosophy of Science , Vol.
12, pp.
72–97.
1945.
"
The Two Concepts of Probability"  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , Vol.
5, No.
4, pp.513–532.
1947.
"On the Application of Inductive Logic" in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , Vol.
8, pp.133–148.
Meaning and Necessity: a Study in Semantics and Modal Logic .
1950, (1962 2nd ed:) Logical Foundations of Probability .
3–15 .
1950.
"
Empiricism, Semantics, Ontology ", Revue Internationale de Philosophie 4: 20–40.
reprinted in: Meaning and Necessity (1956), and in (ed.)
Copi, Irving M .
Contemporary readings in logical theory (1967).
1952.
The Continuum of Inductive Methods .
1958.
Introduction to Symbolic Logic and its Applications .
W.
H.
Myer and J.
Wilkinson, Dover publications, New York.
ISBN  9780486604534   1962.
"The Aim of Inductive Logic" in (eds.)
Nagel , Suppes , and Tarski, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science Stanford,, pp 303–318 (revised and expanded in Carnap & Jeffrey 1971 ).
1963, "Intellectual Autobiography" in Schilpp.
Paul A.
(ed.)
The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap ,  Library Of Living Philosophers V.
XI, Open Court p.
3–83 (1963) ISBN  0-8126-9153-9 , 978-0812691535   1966.
An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science .
Basic Books.
Philosophical Foundations of Physics .
Martin Gardner , ed.
Online excerpt.
1971.
Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability, Vol.
1 .
with Jeffrey, R.
C , University of California Press.
1977.
Two Essays on Entropy .
Shimony, Abner , ed.
1980.
"A Basic System of Inductive Logic Part II" in: Jeffrey, R.
C.
2 .
Untersuchungen zur Allgemeinen Axiomatik .
Edited from unpublished manuscript by T.
Bonk and J.
Mosterín.
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
167 ISBN  3-534-14298-5 ..
 2017, “Value Concepts (1958)” , Synthese , 194(1): 185–194.
doi : 10.1007/s11229-015-0793-2  2019.
Rudolf Carnap: Early Writings , A.W.
Carus, Michael Friedman , Wolfgang Kienzler, Alan Richardson, and Sven Schlotter (eds.
), (The Collected Works of Rudolf Carnap, 1), New York: Oxford University Press.
*For a more complete listing see Carnap’s Works in "Linked bibliography ".
Filmography   Interview with Rudolf Carnap , German TV, 1964  Idea that knowledge comes only/mainly from sensory experience  This article is about the field of philosophy.
For the album by Borknagar, see Empiricism (album) .
Francis Bacon John Locke David Hume  Part of a series on Epistemology   Outline  Category  Index   Schools  Coherentism  Contextualism  Dogmatism  Empiricism  Fallibilism  Foundationalism  Infallibilism  Infinitism  Naturalism  Perspectivism  Pragmatism  Rationalism  Relativism  Skepticism  Solipsism   Concepts  Action  Analytic–synthetic distinction  A priori and a posteriori  Belief  Credence  Certainty  Data  Experience  Information  Justification  Induction  Knowledge  Rationality  Reason  Truth  Wisdom   Domains  Applied epistemology  Evolutionary epistemology  Formal epistemology  Historical epistemology  Metaepistemology  Social epistemology  Virtue epistemology   Epistemologists  Aristotle  Sextus Empiricus  Edmund Gettier  Wang Yangming  René Descartes  David Hume  Immanuel Kant  W.
V.
O.
Quine  more...
  Related fields  Epistemic cognition  Epistemic logic  Philosophy of perception  Philosophy of science  v t e  Part of a series on Research  Research design  Research proposal  Research question  Writing  Argument  Referencing   Research strategy  Interdisciplinary  Multimethodology  Qualitative  Art-based  Quantitative   Philosophical schools  Antipositivism  Constructivism  Critical rationalism  Empiricism  Fallibilism  Pancritical rationalism  Panrationalism  Positivism  Postpositivism  Pragmatism  Realism  Critical realism  Subtle realism   Methodology  Action research  Art methodology  Critical theory  Grounded theory  Hermeneutics  Historiography  Narrative inquiry  Phenomenology  Pragmatism  Scientific method   Methods  Analysis  Case study  Content analysis  Descriptive statistics  Discourse analysis  Ethnography  Autoethnography  Experiment  Field experiment  Social experiment  Quasi-experiment  Field research  Historical method  Inferential statistics  Interviews  Mapping  Cultural mapping  Phenomenography  Secondary research  Bibliometrics  Literature review  Meta-analysis  Scoping review  Systematic review  Scientific modelling  Simulation  Survey   Tools and software  Argument technology  Geographic information system software  Library and information science software  Bibliometrics  Reference management  Science software  Qualitative data analysis  Simulation  Statistics   Philosophy portal v t e  In philosophy , empiricism is an epistemological view which holds that true knowledge or justification comes only or primarily from sensory experience and empirical evidence .
It is one of several competing views within epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism .
Empiricists argue that empiricism is a more reliable method of finding the truth than purely using logical reasoning , because humans have cognitive biases and limitations which lead to errors of judgement.
Empiricism emphasizes the central role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions .
Empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sensory experiences.
Historically, empiricism was associated with the " blank slate " concept ( tabula rasa ), according to which the human mind is "blank" at birth and develops its thoughts only through later experience.
Empiricism in the philosophy of science emphasizes evidence, especially as discovered in experiments .
It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on a priori reasoning, intuition , or revelation .
Empiricism, often used by natural scientists , believes that "knowledge is based on experience" and that "knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification ".
Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.
Etymology   The English term empirical derives from the Ancient Greek word ἐμπειρία, empeiria , which is cognate with and translates to the Latin experientia , from which the words experience and experiment are derived.
Background   Main article: Empirical method  A central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be empirically based on the evidence of the senses.
Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment .
The term semi-empirical is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms , established scientific laws, and previous experimental results to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.
Philosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience.
In epistemology (theory of knowledge) empiricism is typically contrasted with rationalism , which holds that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses, and in the philosophy of mind it is often contrasted with innatism , which holds that some knowledge and ideas are already present in the mind at birth.
However, many Enlightenment rationalists and empiricists still made concessions to each other.
For example, the empiricist John Locke admitted that some knowledge (e.g.
knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone.
Similarly, Robert Boyle , a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we also have innate ideas.
At the same time, the main continental rationalists ( Descartes , Spinoza , and Leibniz ) were also advocates of the empirical "scientific method".
History   Early empiricism   Maharishi Kanada Aristotle  Between 600 and 200 BCE, the Vaisheshika  school of Hindu philosophy , founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada , accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge.
This is enumerated in his work Vaiśeṣika Sūtra .
The Charvaka school held similar beliefs, asserting that perception is the only reliable source of knowledge while inference obtains knowledge with uncertainty.
The earliest Western proto-empiricists were the empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, founded in 330 BCE.
Its members rejected the doctrines of the dogmatic school , preferring to rely on the observation of phantasiai (i.e., phenomena, the appearances).
The Empiric school was closely allied with the Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism.
The notion of tabula rasa ("clean slate" or "blank tablet") connotes a view of mind the as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words "white paper") on which experience leaves marks.
This denies that humans have innate ideas .
The notion dates back to Aristotle , c.
350 BC :  What the mind ( nous ) thinks must be in it in the same sense as letters are on a tablet ( grammateion ) which bears no actual writing ( grammenon );  this is just what happens in the case of the mind.
(Aristotle, On the Soul , 3.4.430 a 1).
Aristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality , and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active nous .
These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's Phaedo and Apology , as well as others).
Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato , and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as " nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu " (Latin for "nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses").
This idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school, from about 330 BCE.
Stoic epistemology generally emphasizes that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it.
The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as "When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon."
A drawing of Ibn Sina (Avicenna) from 1271  Islamic Golden Age and Pre-Renaissance (5th to 15th centuries CE)   During the Middle Ages (from the 5th to the 15th century CE) Aristotle's theory of tabula rasa was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi ( c.
872 – c.
951 CE ), developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna (c.
 980 – 1037 CE)  and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail .
For Avicenna ( Ibn Sina ), for example, the tabula rasa is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education , and knowledge is attained through "empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts" developed through a " syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts".
The intellect itself develops from a material intellect ( al-'aql al-hayulani ), which is a potentiality "that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect ( al- 'aql al-fa'il ), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge".
So the immaterial "active intellect", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.
In the 12th century CE, the Andalusian  Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as "Abubacer" or "Ebu Tophail" in the West) included the theory of tabula rasa as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel , Hayy ibn Yaqdhan in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child "from a tabula rasa to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society" on a desert island , through experience alone.
The Latin translation of his philosophical novel , entitled Philosophus Autodidactus , published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke 's formulation of tabula rasa in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding .
A similar Islamic theological novel, Theologus Autodidactus , was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century.
It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society.
During the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted into scholasticism the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to the mind.
Bonaventure (1221–1274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.
Renaissance Italy   In the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way.
In political and historical writing Niccolò Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing.
Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the "effectual truth" instead.
Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) said, "If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings."
Significantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and Sertorio Quattromani , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno , and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon , who regarded Telesio as "the first of the moderns".
Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers René Descartes and Pierre Gassendi .
The decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c.
1520 – 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody , made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his Dialogo della musica antica e moderna (Florence, 1581).
The Italian word he used for "experiment" was esperimento .
It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf.
Coelho, ed.
Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei ), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history.
Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of ' Pythagoras' hammers ' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded "experience and demonstration" as the sine qua non of valid rational enquiry.
British empiricism   Thomas Hobbes  British empiricism , a retrospective characterization, emerged during the 17th century as an approach to early modern philosophy and modern science .
Although both integral to this overarching transition, Francis Bacon , in England, first advocated for empiricism in 1620 , whereas René Descartes , in France, laid the main groundwork upholding rationalism around 1640.
(Bacon's natural philosophy was influenced by Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and by Swiss physician Paracelsus .)
Contributing later in the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza are retrospectively identified likewise as an empiricist and a rationalist, respectively.
In the Enlightenment of the late 17th century, John Locke in England, and in the 18th century, both George Berkeley in England and David Hume in Scotland , all became leading exponents of empiricism, hence the dominance of empiricism in British philosophy.
The distinction between rationalism and empiricism was not formally made until Immanuel Kant , in Germany, around 1780 , who sought to merge the two views.
In response to the early-to-mid-17th-century " continental rationalism ", John Locke (1632–1704) proposed in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1689) a very influential view wherein the only knowledge humans can have is a posteriori , i.e., based upon experience.
Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a tabula rasa , a "blank tablet", in Locke's words "white paper", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written.
There are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection.
In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas.
The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities.
Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is.
Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is.
For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure.
If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple.
Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities.
For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple.
Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes.
Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations.
According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes .
Bishop George Berkeley  A generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop George Berkeley (1685–1753) determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism .
In response to Locke, he put forth in his Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things only exist either as a result of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving.
(For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.)
In his text Alciphron , Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God.
Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism .
Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711–1776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism .
Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers.
He wrote for example, "Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable.
On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated.
But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities—by ‘proofs’ meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition."
And,    I believe the most general and most popular explication of this matter, is to say , that finding from experience, that there are several new productions in matter, such as the motions and variations of body, and concluding that there must somewhere be a power capable of producing them, we arrive at last by this reasoning at the idea of power and efficacy.
But to be convinced that this explication is more popular than philosophical, we need but reflect on two very obvious principles.
First, That reason alone can never give rise to any original idea, and secondly, that reason, as distinguished from experience, can never make us conclude, that a cause or productive quality is absolutely requisite to every beginning of existence.
Both these considerations have been sufficiently explained: and therefore shall not at present be any farther insisted on.
— Hume, Section XIV, "Of the idea of necessary connexion", in A Treatise of Human Nature  Hume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: relations of ideas and matters of fact (see also Kant's  analytic-synthetic distinction ).
Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g.
"that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g.
"the sun rises in the East") are examples of the second.
All of people's "ideas", in turn, are derived from their "impressions".
For Hume, an "impression" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation.
To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an "idea".
Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations.
David Hume 's empiricism led to numerous philosophical schools.
Hume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason.
Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated habits , developed in response to accumulated sense experiences.
Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method —that of the problem of induction .
Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument.
Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past.
Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past.
Hume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable.
According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom.
Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt.
Phenomenalism   Main article: Phenomenalism  Most of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is rationally unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit.
According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism , anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences.
Phenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events.
Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist—hence the closely related term subjective idealism .
By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences.
This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part.
As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the "permanent possibility of sensation".
Mill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for all meaningful knowledge including mathematics.
As summarized by D.W. Hamlin:   claimed that mathematical truths were merely very highly confirmed generalizations from experience; mathematical inference, generally conceived as deductive  in nature, Mill set down as founded on induction.
Thus, in Mill's philosophy there was no real place for knowledge based on relations of ideas.
In his view logical and mathematical necessity is psychological; we are merely unable to conceive any other possibilities than those that logical and mathematical propositions assert.
This is perhaps the most extreme version of empiricism known, but it has not found many defenders.
Mill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience.
The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations.
This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such "groups of permanent possibilities of sensation" might exist in the first place.
Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered.
In the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of "reality" that goes beyond mere "possibilities of sensation", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism.
Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms.
Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the "gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all".
Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics.
It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science , the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction .
The phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data.
If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter.
But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement.
The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation.
There is, however, no finite set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer.
According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal.
But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer.
If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer.
And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man ).
Logical empiricism   Main article: Logical positivism  Logical empiricism (also logical positivism or neopositivism ) was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g.
a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein .
Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath , Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle , along with A.
J.
Ayer , Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach .
The neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences.
They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848–1925) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language.
This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions.
By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies , they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the "analytic" ( a priori ) and the "synthetic" ( a posteriori ).
On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called " verification principle ".
Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable, is devoid of meaning.
As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems.
In the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists—at least before the 1930s—any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions.
In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of phenomenalism in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics.
That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called protocol sentences , for example, " X at location Y and at time T observes such and such".
The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic–synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.)
came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman , W.
V.
Quine , Hilary Putnam , Karl Popper , and Richard Rorty .
By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most  philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists .
Pragmatism   In the late 19th and early 20th century, several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose.
The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s.
James popularized the term "pragmatism", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of "pragmaticism".
Along with its pragmatic theory of truth , this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.
Charles Sanders Peirce  Charles Peirce (1839–1914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method .
Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright.
Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation.
In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the "data-driven" strict-empiricist view.
Among Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before.
To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning .
The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today.
Peirce's approach "presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them.
According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism , the conclusions of science are always tentative.
The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth".
William James  In his Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the "three cotary propositions of pragmatism" ( L:  cos, cotis whetstone), saying that they "put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism ".
First among these, he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street.
That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses.
Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference , its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique—in a word, incorrigible.
This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or "thisness"—what the Scholastics called its haecceity —that stands beyond control and correction.
Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them.
This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on indirect perception .
Around the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842–1910) coined the term " radical empiricism " to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism—though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures.
James maintained that the empirically observed "directly apprehended universe needs ...
no extraneous trans-empirical connective support",  by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural  phenomena .
James' "radical empiricism" is thus not radical in the context of the term "empiricism", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term " empirical ".
His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.
John Dewey (1859–1952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism .
The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated.
Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism, was that reality is determined by past experience.
Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience.
The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation,  in physical sciences as in ethics.
Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known a posteriori .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Dutch philosopher (1632–1677)  "Spinoza" redirects here.
For other uses, see Spinoza (disambiguation) .
Baruch Spinoza Born Baruch Espinosa  / Bento de Spinosa  ( 1632-11-24 ) 24 November 1632 Amsterdam , Dutch Republic Died 21 February 1677 (1677-02-21) (aged 44) The Hague , Dutch Republic Other names Benedictus de Spinoza Education  Talmud Torah  University of Leiden (no degree)   Era  17th-century philosophy  Age of Enlightenment  Region  Western philosophy  School  Cartesianism   Conceptualism   Correspondence theory of truth    Direct realism   Foundationalism (according to Hegel )   Rationalism  Psychological Egoism   Main interests Epistemology ethics Hebrew Bible  metaphysics  Signature  Baruch ( de ) Spinoza  (24 November 1632 – 21 February 1677), also known under his Latinized pen name Benedictus de Spinoza , was a philosopher of Portuguese-Jewish origin.
As a forerunner of the Age of Reason , Spinoza significantly influenced modern biblical criticism , 17th-century Rationalism , and contemporary conceptions of the self and the universe, establishing himself as one of the most important and radical philosophers of the early modern period .
He was influenced by Stoicism , Maimonides , Niccolò Machiavelli , René Descartes , Thomas Hobbes , and a variety of heterodox Christian thinkers of his day.
Spinoza was born in Amsterdam to a marrano family that had left Portugal for a more tolerant Amsterdam.
He had a traditional education for a Jewish boy, learning Hebrew and studying the sacred texts.
He was part of the wealthy Portuguese Jewish community, where his merchant immigrant father was a prominent member.
As a young man, Spinoza was permanently expelled from the Jewish community for defying rabbinic authorities and disputing Jewish beliefs.
After his expulsion in 1656, he did not affiliate with any religion, instead focusing on philosophical study.
He had a dedicated following, or philosophical sect, who met to discuss his writings.
Spinoza challenged the divine origin of the Hebrew Bible , the nature of God , and the earthly power wielded by religious authorities, Jewish and Christian alike.
He was frequently called an atheist by contemporaries, although nowhere in his work does Spinoza argue against the existence of God .
This can be explained by the fact that, unlike contemporary 21st-century scholars, “when seventeenth-century readers accused Spinoza of atheism, they usually meant that he challenged doctrinal orthodoxy, particularly on moral issues, and not that he denied God’s existence."
His theological studies were inseparable from his thinking on politics; he is grouped with Hobbes, John Locke , Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , and Immanuel Kant , who "helped establish the genre of political writing called secular theology ."
Spinoza's philosophy encompasses nearly every area of philosophical discourse, including metaphysics , epistemology , political philosophy , ethics , philosophy of mind , and philosophy of science .
With an enduring reputation as one of the most original and influential thinkers of the seventeenth century, Rebecca Goldstein dubbed him "the renegade Jew who gave us modernity."
Biography   The Moses and Aaron Church now stands at the site of Spinoza's childhood home.
Family background   See also: History of the Jews in Amsterdam  Spinoza's ancestors, adherents of Crypto-Judaism , faced persecution during the Portuguese Inquisition , enduring torture and public displays of humiliation.
In 1597, his paternal grandfather's family left Vidigueira for Nantes and lived as New Christians , eventually transferring to Holland for an unknown reason.
His maternal ancestors were a leading Oporto commercial family,  and his maternal grandfather was a foremost merchant who drifted between Judaism and Christianity.
Spinoza was raised by his grandmother from ages six to nine and probably learned much about his family history from her.
Spinoza's father Michael was a prominent and wealthy merchant in Amsterdam with a business that had wide geographical reach.
In 1649, he was elected to serve as an administrative officer of the recently united congregation Talmud Torah .
He married his cousin Rachael d’Espinosa, daughter of his uncle Abraham d’Espinosa, who was also a community leader and Michael's business partner.
Marrying cousins was common in the Portuguese Jewish community then, giving Michael access to his father-in-law's commercial network and capital.
Rachel's children died in infancy, and she died in 1627.
After the death of Rachel, Michael married Hannah Deborah, with whom he had five children.
His second wife brought a dowry to the marriage that was absorbed into Michael's business capital instead of being set aside for her children, which may have caused a grudge between Spinoza and his father.
The family lived on the artificial island on the south side of the River Amstel, known as the Vlooienburg , at the fifth house along the Houtgracht canal.
The Jewish quarter was not formally divided.
The family lived close to the Bet Ya'acov synagogue, and nearby were Christians, including the artist Rembrandt .
Miriam was their first child, followed by Isaac who was expected to take over as head of the family and the commercial enterprise but died in 1649.
Baruch Espinosa, the third child, was born on 24 November 1632 and named as per tradition for his maternal grandfather.
Spinoza's younger brother Gabriel was born in 1634, followed by another sister Rebecca.
Miriam married Samuel de Caceres but died shortly after childbirth.
According to Jewish practice, Samuel had to marry his former sister-in-law Rebecca.
Following his brother's death, Spinoza's place as head of the family and its business meant scholarly ambitions were pushed aside.
Spinoza's mother, Hannah Deborah, died when Spinoza was six years old.
Michael's third wife, Esther, raised Spinoza from age nine; she lacked formal Jewish knowledge due to growing up a New Christian and only spoke Portuguese at home.
The marriage was childless.
Spinoza's sister Rebecca, brother Gabriel, and nephew eventually migrated to Curaçao , and the remaining family joined them after Spinoza's death.
Uriel da Costa's early influence   Samuel Hirszenberg 's imagined scene of Uriel da Costa instructing Spinoza (1901)  Through his mother, Spinoza was related to the philosopher Uriel da Costa , who stirred controversy in Amsterdam's Portuguese Jewish community.
Da Costa questioned traditional Christian and Jewish beliefs, asserting that, for example, their origins were based on human inventions instead of God's revelation.
His clashes with the religious establishment led to his excommunication twice by rabbinic authorities, who imposed humiliation and social exclusion.
In 1639, as part of an agreement to be readmitted, da Costa had to prostrate himself for worshippers to step over him.
He died in 1640, reportedly committing suicide.
During his childhood, Spinoza was likely unaware of his family connection with Uriel da Costa; still, as a teenager, he certainly heard discussions about him.
Steven Nadler explains that, although da Costa died when Spinoza was eight, his ideas shaped Spinoza's intellectual development.
Amsterdam’s Jewish communities long remembered and discussed da Costa's skepticism about organized religion, denial of the soul's immortality, and the idea that Moses didn't write the Torah, influencing Spinoza's intellectual journey.
School days and the family business   Spinoza's name crossed out on the list of pupils of Talmud Torah (Ets Haim in Hebrew)  Spinoza attended the Talmud Torah school adjoining the Bet Ya'acov synagogue, a few doors down from his home, headed by the senior Rabbi Saul Levi Morteira .
Instructed in Spanish, the language of learning and literature, students in the elementary school learned to read the prayerbook and the Torah in Hebrew, translate the weekly section into Spanish, and study Rashi 's commentary.
Spinoza's name does not appear on the registry after age fourteen, and, likely, he never studied with rabbis such as Manasseh ben Israel and Morteira.
Spinoza possibly went to work around fourteen and almost certainly was needed in his father's business after his brother died in 1649.
During the First Anglo-Dutch War , much of the Spinoza firm's ships and cargo were captured by English ships, severely affecting the firm's financial viability.
The firm was saddled with debt by the war's end in 1654 due to their merchant voyages being intercepted by the English, which led to the firm's decline.
Spinoza's father died in 1654, making him the head of the family, responsible for organizing and leading the Jewish mourning rituals, and in a business partnership with his brother of their inherited firm.
As Spinoza's father had poor health for some years before his death, he was significantly involved in the business, putting his intellectual curiosity on hold.
Until 1656, he continued financially supporting the synagogue and attending services in compliance with synagogue conventions and practice.
By 1655, the family's wealth had evaporated and the business effectively ended.
In March 1656, Spinoza went to the city authorities for protection against debts in the Portuguese Jewish community.
To free himself from the responsibility of paying debts owed to his late father, Spinoza appealed to the city to declare him an orphan;  since he was a legal minor, not understanding his father's indebtedness would remove the obligation to repay his debts and retrospectively renounce his inheritance.
Though he was released of all debts and legally in the right, his reputation as a merchant was permanently damaged in addition to violating a synagogue regulation that business matters are to be arbitrated within the community.
Intellectual explorations   Sometime between 1654 and 1658, Spinoza began to study Latin with Franciscus van den Enden , a former Jesuit who was a political radical and likely introduced Spinoza to scholastic and modern philosophy , including Descartes.
Spinoza adopted the Latin name, Benedictus de Spinoza, began boarding with Van den Enden, and began teaching in his school.
During this period, Spinoza also became acquainted with the Collegiants , an anti-clerical sect of Remonstrants with tendencies towards rationalism , and with the liberal faction among the Mennonites who had existed for a century but were close to the Remonstrants.
Many of his friends belonged to dissident Christian groups that met regularly as discussion groups and typically rejected the authority of established churches and traditional dogmas.
In the second half of the 1650s and the first half of the 1660s Spinoza became acquainted with several persons who would themselves emerge as unorthodox thinkers: this group, known as the Spinoza Circle, included Pieter Balling , Jarich Jelles , Lodewijk Meyer , Johannes Bouwmeester and Adriaen Koerbagh .
Expulsion from the Jewish community   Excommunicated Spinoza by Samuel Hirszenberg (1907), the second of his two modern paintings imagining scenes of Spinoza's life.
Amsterdam was tolerant of religious diversity so long as it was practiced discreetly, and Jews were not legally confined to a ghetto .
The community was concerned with protecting its reputation and not associating with Spinoza lest his controversial views provide the basis for possible persecution or expulsion.
Spinoza did not openly break with Jewish authorities until his father died in 1654 when he became public and defiant, resulting from lengthy and stressful religious, financial, and legal clashes involving his business and synagogue, such as when Spinoza violated synagogue regulations by going to city authorities rather than resolving his disputes within the community to free himself from paying his father's debt.
On 27 July 1656, the Talmud Torah community leaders, which included Aboab de Fonseca ,  issued a writ of herem against the 23-year-old Spinoza.
Spinoza's censure was the harshest ever pronounced in the community, carrying tremendous emotional and spiritual impact.
The exact reason for expelling Spinoza is not stated, only referring to his "abominable heresies", "monstrous deeds", and the testimony of witnesses "in the presence of the said Espinoza".
Even though the Amsterdam municipal authorities were not directly involved in Spinoza's censure itself, the town council expressly ordered the Portuguese-Jewish community to regulate their conduct and ensure that the community kept a strict observance of Jewish law.
Other evidence shows that the danger of upsetting the civil authorities was not far from mind, such as bans adopted by the synagogue on public weddings or funeral processions and on discussing religious matters with Christians, lest such activity might "disturb the liberty we enjoy".
Ban in Portuguese of Baruch Spinoza by the leaders of the community on 6 Av 5416 (27 July 1656)  Before the expulsion, Spinoza had not published anything or written a treatise; if Spinoza was voicing his criticism of Judaism that later appeared through his philosophical works, such as Part I of Ethics , then there can be no wonder that he was severely punished.
He might already have been voicing the view expressed later in his Theological-Political Treatise that the civil authorities should suppress Judaism as harmful to the Jews themselves.
He had effectively stopped contributing to the synagogue by March 1656 because of his bleak financial situation.
Unlike most censures issued by the Amsterdam congregation, since the censure did not lead to repentance, it was never rescinded.
After the censure, Spinoza is said to have written an Apologia in Spanish to the community leaders, defending his views and condemning the rabbis, but it is now lost.
Spinoza's expulsion from the Jewish community did not lead him to convert to Christianity.
Spinoza maintained a close association with the Collegiants and Quakers , moved to a town near the Collegiants' headquarters, and was buried at the Protestant Church, Nieuwe Kerk, The Hague , since burial was a sectarian matter and he was ineligible to be buried in the Jewish cemetery.
Spinoza did not maintain a sense of Jewish identity because, in his view, being a secular and assimilated Jew was nonsense.
Career as a philosopher   Seal with Spinoza's initials and the Latin word meaning "caution"  Study room of Spinoza in Rijnsburg  Spinoza has been called "the reticent radical", who proceeded cautiously for the next 22 years, quietly writing and studying as a private scholar.
He initially taught in the school of his Latin tutor, Franciscus van den Enden , with whom he boarded for a time.
Later upon leaving Amsterdam, he earned a living as a lens grinder.
He also received some financial assistance from supporters of his intellectual stance.
After the herem , the Amsterdam municipal authorities expelled Spinoza from Amsterdam, "responding to the appeals of the rabbis, and also of the Calvinist clergy, who had been vicariously offended by the existence of a free thinker in the synagogue".
He spent a brief time in or near the village of Ouderkerk aan de Amstel , where the Portuguese Jews had been allowed to buy land to establish Beth Haim , a Jewish burying ground.
Spinoza's parents and grandparents are buried there.
Spinoza returned soon afterward to Amsterdam and lived there quietly for several years, giving private philosophy lessons and grinding lenses, before leaving the city in 1660 or 1661.
During this time in Amsterdam, Spinoza wrote his Short Treatise on God, Man, and His Well-Being , which he never published in his lifetime, assuming with good reason that it might get suppressed.
Two Dutch translations of it survive, discovered about 1810.
In 1660 or 1661, Spinoza moved from Amsterdam to Rijnsburg (near Leiden ), the center of Dutch Remonstrants known as the Collegiants .
In Rijnsburg, he began work on his Descartes' "Principles of Philosophy" as well as on his masterpiece, the Ethics .
In 1663, he returned briefly to Amsterdam, where he finished and published Descartes' "Principles of Philosophy" , the only work published in his lifetime under his own name, and then moved the same year to Voorburg .
In Voorburg, Spinoza continued work on his magnum opus, titled posthumously Ethics , and corresponded with scientists, philosophers, and theologians throughout Europe.
He published in Latin, anonymously, and with false printer information Theological-Political Treatise (TTP) in 1670, in defense of secular and constitutional government, and in support of Johan de Witt , the Dutch Republic's grand pensionary , against the Stadtholder, the Prince of Orange.
Spinoza deliberately chose to write in Latin, which meant that his message was restricted to those learned few who knew the scholarly language.
Dutch philosopher and physician, Adriaan Koerbagh attempted to publish a work in Dutch questioning the Trinity as a concept, asserted that Jesus was a human being, and that the scripture was not divinely inspired, was proposing ideas that also appear in Spinoza writings in Latin.
Koerbagh's "A Flower Garden of All Sorts of Delights" in Dutch came to the attention of the authorities, who incarcerated him to be followed by exile, but he died while in prison.
Spinoza did not wish to die a martyr to his ideas and exercised caution by publishing his 1670 TTP anonymously in Latin and refraining from publishing any further works.
Unlike Koerbagh, Spinoza died at home in his own bed.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz visited Spinoza and claimed that Spinoza's life was in danger when supporters of the Prince of Orange murdered de Witt in 1672.
While the TTP was published anonymously, the work did not long remain so, and de Witt's enemies characterized it as "forged in Hell by a renegade Jew and the Devil, and issued with the knowledge of Jan de Witt".
It was placed on the Catholic Church's Index of Prohibited Works in 1679.
In 1670, Spinoza moved to The Hague , where he lived on a small pension from Jan de Witt and a small annuity from the brother of his dead friend, Simon de Vries.
He worked on the manuscript of what was later called Ethics , wrote an unfinished Hebrew grammar, began his Political Treatise (TP), left unfinished at his death, wrote two scientific essays ("On the Rainbow" and "On the Calculation of Chances"), and began a Dutch translation of the Bible (which he later destroyed).
Spinoza was offered the chair of philosophy at the University of Heidelberg .
He refused it, perhaps because of the possibility that it might in some way curb his freedom of thought .
Spinoza also corresponded with Peter Serrarius , a radical Protestant and millenarian merchant.
Serrarius was a patron to Spinoza after Spinoza was expelled from the Jewish community.
He acted as an intermediary for Spinoza's correspondence, sending and receiving letters of the philosopher to and from third parties.
Spinoza and Serrarius maintained their relationship until Serrarius died in 1669.
By the beginning of the 1660s, Spinoza's name became more widely known.
The Secretary of the British Royal Society  Henry Oldenburg paid him visits and became a correspondent with Spinoza for the rest of his life.
In 1676, Leibniz wanted to examine a manuscript copy of the Ethics and traveled to the Hague to meet Spinoza, conversing with him at great length.
Lens-grinding and optics   Spinoza earned a modest living from lens-grinding and instrument making, yet he was involved in important optical investigations of the day while living in Voorburg, through correspondence and friendships with scientist Christiaan Huygens and mathematician Johannes Hudde , including debate over microscope design with Huygens, favoring small objectives  and collaborating on calculations for a prospective 40-foot (12 m) focal length telescope which would have been one of the largest in Europe at the time.
He was known for making not just lenses but also telescopes and microscopes.
The quality of Spinoza's lenses was much praised by Christiaan Huygens, among others.
In fact, his technique and instruments were so esteemed that Constantijn Huygens ground a "clear and bright" telescope lens with focal length of 42 feet (13 m) in 1687 from one of Spinoza's grinding dishes, ten years after his death.
He was said by anatomist Theodor Kerckring to have produced an "excellent" microscope, the quality of which was the foundation of Kerckring's anatomy claims.
During his time as a lens and instrument maker, he was also supported by small but regular donations from close friends.
Death and rescue of his unpublished writings   Burial monument of Spinoza at the churchyard of the Nieuwe Kerk (The Hague)  Spinoza's health began to fail in 1676, and he died in The Hague on 21 February 1677 at age 44, attended by a physician friend, Georg Herman Schuller.
Although he had been ill with some form of lung affliction, described as " ex phthisi ", possibly complicated by silicosis brought on by grinding glass lenses,  he and everyone he lived with did not expect him to die that day, and he died without leaving a will.
There were assertions that he had repented his philosophical stances on his deathbed, but all credible evidence points to his dying unrepentant and in tranquility.
Lutheran preacher Johannes Colerus wrote the first biography of Spinoza for the original reason of researching his final days.
Spinoza was buried in the Nieuwe Kerk (New Church) on the Spui four days after his death, on 25 February, inside the church, with six others in the same vault.
At the time there was no memorial plaque for Spinoza.
In the 18th century, the vault was emptied and the "remnants scattered over the earth of the churchyard."
The memorial plaque visitors now see is outside, where some of his remains are part of the churchyard's soil.
When he died, friends rescued his personal belongings and papers, most importantly his unpublished manuscripts.
These were stored in a cabinet attached to his writing desk.
His supporters swiftly took them away for safekeeping from seizure by those wishing to suppress his writings.
They do not appear in the inventory of his possessions at death.
Within a year of his death, his supporters translated his manuscripts written in Latin into Dutch, and subsequently into other vernacular languages.
His works were banned by Dutch authorities and later the Roman Catholic Church.
Writings   Spinoza published little in his lifetime and most of his formal writings were in Latin, which would have reached only a small number of readers.
He actively told supporters not to translate his works, but following his death, his supporters published his works posthumously, in Latin and Dutch.
Other translations to vulgar languages followed.
A descriptive bibliography has been published that contextualizes all aspects of the publication history of Spinoza's writings from manuscript to print.
The reaction to the anonymously published work, Theologico-Political Treatise (TTP)(1670), was extremely unfavorable.
Spinoza abstained from publishing further, but his writings circulated among his supporters in manuscript form during his lifetime.
Wary and independent, he wore a signet ring which he used to mark his letters and which was engraved with the word caute (Latin for "cautiously") underneath a rose, itself a symbol of secrecy.
The Ethics and all other works, apart from the Descartes' Principles of Philosophy , which was published under his own name, and the Theologico-Political Treatise , published anonymously, appeared in print after his 1677 death.
The Opera Posthuma was edited by his friends in secrecy to prevent confiscation and destruction of manuscripts.
The Ethics contains many still-unresolved obscurities and is written with a forbidding mathematical structure modeled on Euclid's geometry and has been described as a "superbly cryptic masterwork".
Correspondence   See also: Epistolae (Spinoza) and List of Epistolae (Letters) of Spinoza  Letter from Spinoza to Leibniz, with his BdS seal  Few letters are extant for such an important intellectual figure and none before 1661.
Practically all of them are of philosophical, technical nature, since "the political and ecclesiastical persecution of the
time led the original editors of the Opera Posthuma his friends Lodewijk Meyer, Georg Hermann Schuller, and Johannes Bouwmeester—to delete personal matters and to disregard letters of a personal nature".
Spinoza engaged in correspondence from December 1664 to June 1665 with Willem van Blijenbergh , an amateur Calvinist theologian, who questioned Spinoza on the definition of evil .
Later in 1665, Spinoza notified Oldenburg that he had started to work on a new book, the Theologico-Political Treatise , published in 1670.
Leibniz disagreed harshly with Spinoza in his own manuscript "Refutation of Spinoza",  but he is also known to have met with Spinoza on at least one occasion   and his work bears some striking resemblances to some parts of Spinoza's philosophy, like in Monadology .
Leibniz was concerned when his name was not redacted from a letter to Spinoza that was printed in the Opera Posthuma .
In a letter, written in December 1675 and sent to Albert Burgh, who wanted to defend Catholicism , Spinoza clearly explained his view of both Catholicism and Islam .
He stated that both religions are made "to deceive the people and to constrain the minds of men".
He also states that Islam far surpasses Catholicism in doing so.
The Tractatus de Deo, Homine, ejusque Felicitate (Treatise on God, man and his happiness) was one of the last of Spinoza's works to be published, between 1851  and 1862.
Philosophy   Part of a series on Jewish philosophy  Hellenistic  Positions:  Hasmonean Sadducean Pharisee Boethusian  People:  Aristobulus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria   Medieval  Influenced by:  Brethren of Purity Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ismaili philosophy Jewish Kalam Kabbalah Rabbinic Judaism  Spanish and European:  Hasdai ibn Shaprut Ibn Gabirol Abraham bar Hiyya Bahya ibn Paquda Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Joseph ibn Tzaddik Abraham ibn Ezra Maimonides Nachmanides Samuel ibn Tibbon Joseph ben Judah Shem-Tov ibn Falaquera Gersonides Moses of Narbonne Isaac ben Sheshet Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Elia del Medigo Judah Minz Isaac Abarbanel Judah Leon Abravanel  Yemenite:  Natan'el al-Fayyumi Mansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari  Other:  Isaac Israeli Saadia Gaon al-Mukkamas Hibat Allah Abu'l-Barakat Ibn Kammuna  Positions:  Maimonidean / Anti-Maimonidean Kabbalist Karaism Talmudic Tosafist   Modern  Positions:  Orthodox Sephardic Chabad Chassidic Conservative Reform Existentialist Reconstructionist Holocaust Renewal Neo-Hasidic Mussar Rambamist  People:  Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa Baruch Spinoza Salomon Maimon Joseph Solomon Delmedigo Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chelm Eliezer ben Elijah Ashkenazi Tzvi Ashkenazi Jacob Emden Samuel Hirsch Shneur Zalman of Liadi Simcha Bunim of Peshischa Samson Raphael Hirsch Jacob Abendana Isaac Cardoso David Nieto Isaac Orobio de Castro Moses Mendelssohn Samuel David Luzzatto Elijah Benamozegh Moses Hess Eliezer Berkovits Eliyahu Dessler Monsieur Chouchani Emmanuel Levinas Martin Buber Gershom Scholem Abraham Isaac Kook Joseph Soloveitchik Menachem Mendel Schneerson   Topics  Anger Chosen people Eschatology Ethics Faith God Happiness Holiness Holocaust Messiah Microcosm–macrocosm Righteousness  v t e  Spinoza's philosophy is explicated in his two major publications originally written in Latin, the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (TTP) (1670) and Ethics , published posthumously in Latin and Dutch.
His incomplete Tractatus Politicus was also published posthumously.
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (TTP)    Main article: Tractatus Theologico-Politicus See also: Thomas Hobbes  Despite its being published in Latin rather than a vernacular language, this 1670 treatise published in Spinoza's lifetime caused a huge reaction, described as "one of the most significant events in European intellectual history."
Ethics   Main article: Ethics (Spinoza book)  The Ethics has been associated with that of Leibniz and René Descartes as part of the rationalist school of thought,  which includes the assumption that ideas correspond to reality perfectly, in the same way that mathematics is supposed to be an exact representation of the world.
The writings of René Descartes have been described as "Spinoza's starting point".
Spinoza's first publication was his 1663 geometric exposition of proofs using Euclid 's model with definitions and axioms of Descartes' Principles of Philosophy .
Following Descartes, Spinoza aimed to understand truth through logical deductions from 'clear and distinct ideas', a process which always begins from the 'self-evident truths' of axioms .
However, his actual project does not end there: from his first work to his last one, there runs a thread of "attending to the highest good" (which also is the highest truth) and thereby achieving a state of peace and harmony, either in the metaphysical or political manner.
In this light, the Principles of Philosophy might be viewed as an "exercise in geometric method and philosophy", paving the way for numerous concepts and conclusions that would define his philosophy (see Cogitata Metaphysica).
Metaphysics   Spinoza's metaphysics consists of one thing, substance, and its modifications (modes).
Early in The Ethics Spinoza argues that there is only one substance, which is absolutely infinite , self-caused, and eternal.
He calls this substance " God ", or " Nature ".
In fact, he takes these two terms to be synonymous (in the Latin the phrase he uses is "Deus sive Natura" ).
For Spinoza the whole of the natural  universe consists of one substance, God, or, what is the same, Nature, and its modifications (modes).
It cannot be overemphasized how the rest of Spinoza's philosophy—his philosophy of mind, his epistemology, his psychology, his moral philosophy, his political philosophy, and his philosophy of religion—flows more or less directly from the metaphysical underpinnings in Part I of the Ethics .
Substance, attributes, and modes   Spinoza sets forth a vision of Being, illuminated by his awareness of God.
They may seem strange at first sight.
To the question "What is?"
he replies: "Substance, its attributes, and modes".
— Karl Jaspers   Following Maimonides , Spinoza defined substance as "that which is in itself and is conceived through itself", meaning that it can be understood without any reference to anything external.
Being conceptually independent also means that the same thing is ontologically independent, depending on nothing else for its existence and being the 'cause of itself' ( causa sui ).
A mode is something which cannot exist independently but rather must do so as part of something else on which it depends, including properties (for example colour), relations (such as size) and individual things.
Modes can be further divided into 'finite' and 'infinite' ones, with the latter being evident in every finite mode (he gives the examples of "motion" and "rest").
The traditional understanding of an attribute in philosophy is similar to Spinoza's modes, though he uses that word differently.
To him, an attribute is "that which the intellect perceives as constituting the essence of substance", and there are possibly an infinite number of them.
It is the essential nature which is "attributed" to reality by intellect.
Probable portrait of Spinoza, by Barend Graat , 1666  Spinoza defined God as "a substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses eternal and infinite essence", and since "no cause or reason" can prevent such a being from existing, it therefore must exist.
This is a form of the ontological argument , which is claimed to prove the existence of God, but Spinoza went further in stating that it showed that only God exists.
Accordingly, he stated that "Whatever is, is in God, and nothing can exist or be conceived without God".
This means that God is identical with the universe, an idea which he encapsulated in the phrase " Deus sive Natura " ('God or Nature'), which has been interpreted by some as atheism or pantheism .
Though there are many more of them, God can be known by humans either through the attribute of extension or the attribute of thought.
Thought and extension represent giving complete accounts of the world in mental or physical terms.
To this end, he says that "the mind and the body are one and the same thing, which is conceived now under the attribute of thought, now under the attribute of extension".
After stating his proof for God's existence, Spinoza addresses who "God" is.
Spinoza believed that God is "the sum of the natural and physical laws of the universe and certainly not an individual entity or creator".
Spinoza attempts to prove that God is just the substance of the universe by first stating that substances do not share attributes or essences and then demonstrating that God is a "substance" with an infinite number of attributes, thus the attributes possessed by any other substances must also be possessed by God.
Therefore, God is just the sum of all the substances of the universe.
God is the only substance in the universe, and everything is a part of God.
This view was described by Charles Hartshorne as Classical Pantheism .
Spinoza argues that "things could not have been produced by God in any other way or in any other order than is the case".
Therefore, concepts such as 'freedom' and 'chance' have little meaning.
This picture of Spinoza's determinism is illuminated in Ethics : "the infant believes that it is by free will that it seeks the breast; the angry boy believes that by free will he wishes vengeance; the timid man thinks it is with free will he seeks flight; the drunkard believes that by a free command of his mind he speaks the things which when sober he wishes he had left unsaid.
… All believe that they speak by a free command of the mind, whilst, in truth, they have no power to restrain the impulse which they have to speak."
In his letter to G.
H.
Schuller (Letter 58), he wrote: "men are conscious of their desire and unaware of the causes by which  are determined."
He also held that knowledge of true causes of passive emotion can transform it into an active emotion, thus anticipating one of the key ideas of Sigmund Freud 's psychoanalysis .
According to Eric Schliesser, Spinoza was skeptical regarding the possibility of knowledge of nature and as a consequence at odds with scientists such as Galileo and Huygens.
Causality   Although the principle of sufficient reason is commonly associated with Gottfried Leibniz , Spinoza employs it in a more systematic manner.
In Spinoza's philosophical framework, questions concerning why a particular phenomenon exists are always answerable, and these answers are provided in terms of the relevant cause.
Spinoza's approach involves first providing an account of a phenomenon, such as goodness or consciousness, to explain it, and then further explaining the phenomenon in terms of itself.
For instance, he might argue that consciousness is the degree of power of a mental state.
Spinoza has also been described as an " Epicurean materialist",  specifically in reference to his opposition to Cartesian mind-body dualism.
This view was held by Epicureans before him, as they believed that atoms with their probabilistic paths were the only substance that existed fundamentally.
Spinoza, however, deviated significantly from Epicureans by adhering to strict determinism, much like the Stoics before him, in contrast to the Epicurean belief in the probabilistic path of atoms, which is more in line with contemporary thought on quantum mechanics .
The emotions   One thing which seems, on the surface, to distinguish Spinoza's view of the emotions from both Descartes' and Hume's pictures of them is that he takes the emotions to be cognitive in some important respect.
Jonathan Bennett claims that "Spinoza mainly saw emotions as caused by cognitions.
he did not say this clearly enough and sometimes lost sight of it entirely."
Spinoza provides several demonstrations which purport to show truths about how human emotions work.
The picture presented is, according to Bennett, "unflattering, coloured as it is by universal egoism ".
Ethical philosophy   Engraving of Spinoza, captioned in Latin, "A Jew and an atheist"; he vehemently denied being an atheist.
Spinoza's notion of blessedness figures centrally in his ethical philosophy.
Spinoza writes that blessedness (or salvation or freedom), "consists, namely, in a constant and eternal love of God, or in God’s love for men.
Philosopher Jonathan Bennett interprets this as Spinoza wanting "'blessedness' to stand for the most elevated and desirable state one could possibly be in."
Understanding what is meant by "most elevated and desirable state" requires understanding Spinoza's notion of conatus ( striving , but not necessarily with any teleological baggage)  and that "perfection" refers not to (moral) value, but to completeness.
Given that individuals are identified as mere modifications of the infinite Substance, it follows that no individual can ever be fully complete, i.e., perfect, or blessed.
Absolute perfection, is, in Spinoza's thought, reserved solely for Substance.
Nevertheless, modes can attain a lesser form of blessedness, namely, that of pure understanding of oneself as one really is, i.e., as a definite modification of Substance in a certain set of relationships with everything else in the universe.
That this is what Spinoza has in mind can be seen at the end of the Ethics , in E5P24 and E5P25, where Spinoza makes two final key moves, unifying the metaphysical, epistemological, and ethical propositions he has developed over the course of the work.
In E5P24, he links the understanding of particular things to the understanding of God, or Substance; in E5P25, the conatus of the mind is linked to the third kind of knowledge ( Intuition ).
From here, it is a short step to the connection of Blessedness with the amor dei intellectualis ("intellectual love of God").
Tractatus Politicus (Political Treatise) (TP)   Main article: Tractatus Politicus  The title page of the Tractatus politicus in the Opera Posthuma .
This unfinished treatise in Latin expounds Spinoza's ideas about forms of government.
As with the Ethics , this work was published posthumously by his circle of supporters in Latin and in Dutch.
The subtitle is " In quo demonstratur, quomodo Societas, ubi Imperium Monarchicum locum habet, sicut et ea, ubi Optimi imperant, debet institui, ne in Tyrannidem labatur, et ut Pax, Libertasque civium inviolata maneat ."
("In which it is demonstrated how a society, may it be a monarchy or an aristocracy , can be best governed, so as not to fall into tyranny , and so that the peace and liberty of the citizens remain unviolated").
Although Spinoza’s political and theological thought was radical on many ways, he held traditional views on the place of women.
In the TP, he writes briefly on the last page of the TP that women were “naturally” subordinate to men, stating bluntly his women are “by nature” not by “institutional practice” subordinate to men.
Both his major biographers in English remark on his view of women.
Biographer Steven Nadler is clearly disappointed by Spinoza's only statement on women.
“It is unfortunate that the very last words we have by him, at the end of the extant chapters of the Political Treatise , are a short digression … on the unsuitability of women to hold political power.”  Likewise Jonathan I.
Israel says that Spinoza's views are “hugely disappointing to the modern reader” and that most that can be said in his defense is that “in his age rampant tyrannizing over women was indeed universal.” He goes on to say, "one may legitimately wonder why did Spinoza, if he was to be consistent, not apply his highly sceptical and innovative, for his time uniquely subversive, de-legtimizing general principle likewise to men's tyrannizing over women."
One scholar has attempted to rationalize Spinoza’s views excluding women from full citizenship.
But the topic has not attracted major consideration in Spinoza studies.
Pantheism   See also: Pantheism controversy  Spinoza was considered to be an atheist because he used the word "God"  to signify a concept that was different from that of traditional Judeo–Christian monotheism.
"Spinoza expressly denies personality and consciousness to God; he has neither intelligence, feeling, nor will; he does not act according to purpose, but everything follows necessarily from his nature, according to law...."  Thus, Spinoza's cool, indifferent God differs from the concept of an anthropomorphic, fatherly God who cares about humanity.
In 1785, Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi published a condemnation of Spinoza's pantheism, after Gotthold Lessing was thought to have confessed on his deathbed to being a "Spinozist", which was the equivalent in his time of being called an atheist .
Jacobi claimed that Spinoza's doctrine was pure materialism, because all Nature and God are said to be nothing but extended substance .
This, for Jacobi, was the result of Enlightenment rationalism and it would finally end in absolute atheism.
Moses Mendelssohn disagreed with Jacobi, saying that there is no actual difference between theism and pantheism.
The issue became a major intellectual and religious concern for European civilization at the time.
The attraction of Spinoza's philosophy to late 18th-century Europeans was that it provided an alternative to materialism, atheism, and deism.
Three of Spinoza's ideas strongly appealed to them:  the unity of all that exists;  the regularity of all that happens;  the identity of spirit and nature.
By 1879, Spinoza's pantheism was praised by many, but was considered by some to be alarming and dangerously inimical.
Spinoza's "God or Nature" ( Deus sive Natura ) provided a living, natural God, in contrast to Isaac Newton 's first cause argument and the dead mechanism of Julien Offray de La Mettrie 's (1709–1751) work, Man a Machine ( L'homme machine ) .
Coleridge and Shelley saw in Spinoza's philosophy a religion of nature .
Novalis called him the "God-intoxicated man".
Spinoza inspired the poet Shelley to write his essay " The Necessity of Atheism ".
It is a widespread belief that Spinoza equated God with the material universe.
He has therefore been called the "prophet"  and "prince"  and most eminent expounder of pantheism .
More specifically, in a letter to Henry Oldenburg he states, "as to the view of certain people that I identify God with Nature (taken as a kind of mass or corporeal matter), they are quite mistaken".
For Spinoza, the universe (cosmos) is a mode under two attributes of Thought and Extension .
God has infinitely many other attributes which are not present in the world.
According to German philosopher Karl Jaspers (1883–1969), when Spinoza wrote Deus sive Natura (Latin for 'God or Nature'), Spinoza meant God was natura naturans (nature doing what nature does; literally, 'nature naturing'), not natura naturata (nature already created; literally, 'nature natured').
Jaspers believed that Spinoza, in his philosophical system, did not mean to say that God and Nature are interchangeable terms, but rather that God's transcendence was attested by his infinitely many attributes, and that two attributes known by humans, namely Thought and Extension, signified God's immanence.
Even God under the attributes of thought and extension cannot be identified strictly with our world.
That world is of course "divisible"; it has parts.
But Spinoza said, "no attribute of a substance can be truly conceived from which it follows that the substance can be divided", meaning that one cannot conceive an attribute in a way that leads to division of substance.
He also said, "a substance which is absolutely infinite is indivisible" (Ethics, Part I, Propositions 12 and 13).
Following this logic, our world should be considered as a mode under two attributes of thought and extension.
Therefore, according to Jaspers, the pantheist formula "One and All" would apply to Spinoza only if the "One" preserves its transcendence and the "All" were not interpreted as the totality of finite things.
Martial Guéroult (1891–1976) suggested the term panentheism , rather than pantheism to describe Spinoza's view of the relation between God and the world.
The world is not God, but in a strong sense, "in" God.
Not only do finite things have God as their cause; they cannot be conceived without God.
However, American panentheist philosopher Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000) insisted on the term Classical Pantheism to describe Spinoza's view.
According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Spinoza's God is an "infinite intellect" ( Ethics 2p11c) — all-knowing (2p3), and capable of loving both himself—and us, insofar as we are part of his perfection (5p35c).
And if the mark of a personal being is that it is one towards which we can entertain personal attitudes, then we should note too that Spinoza recommends amor intellectualis dei (the intellectual love of God) as the supreme good for man (5p33).
However, the matter is complex.
Spinoza's God does not have free will (1p32c1), he does not have purposes or intentions (1 appendix), and Spinoza insists that "neither intellect nor will pertain to the nature of God" (1p17s1).
Moreover, while we may love God, we need to remember that God is not a being who could ever love us back.
"He who loves God cannot strive that God should love him in return", says Spinoza (5p19).
Steven Nadler suggests that settling the question of Spinoza's atheism or pantheism depends on an analysis of attitudes.
If pantheism is associated with religiosity, then Spinoza is not a pantheist, since Spinoza believes that the proper stance to take towards God is not one of reverence or religious awe, but instead one of objective study and reason, since taking the religious stance would leave one open to the possibility of error and superstition.
Other philosophical connections   Many authors have discussed similarities between Spinoza's philosophy and Eastern philosophical traditions.
Few decades after the philosopher's death, Pierre Bayle , in his famous Historical and Critical Dictionary (1697) pointed out a link between Spinoza's alleged atheism with "the theology of a Chinese sect", supposedly called "Foe Kiao",  of which had learned thanks to the testimonies of the Jesuit missions in Eastern Asia.
A century later, Kant also established a parallel between the philosophy of Spinoza and the think of Laozi (a "monstrous system" in his words), grouping both under the name of pantheists, criticizing what he described as mystical tendencies in them.
The 19th-century German Sanskritist Theodor Goldstücker was one of the early figures to notice the similarities between Spinoza's religious conceptions and the Vedanta tradition of India, writing that Spinoza's thought was "...
so exact a representation of the ideas of the Vedanta, that we might have suspected its founder to have borrowed the fundamental principles of his system from the Hindus, did his biography not satisfy us that he was wholly unacquainted with their doctrines..."    Max Müller also noted the striking similarities between Vedanta and the system of Spinoza, equating the Brahman in Vedanta to Spinoza's 'Substantia.'
Legacy   A Dutch commemorative coin issued on the 250th death anniversary of Spinoza, 1927  Spinoza's ideas have had a major impact on intellectual debates from the seventeenth century to the current era.
How Spinoza is viewed has gone from the atheistic author of treatises that undermine Judaism and organized religion, to a cultural hero, the first secular Jew.
One writer contends that what draws readers to Spinoza today and "makes him perhaps the most beloved philosopher since Socrates, is his confident equanimity".
He is not a despairing nihilist , but rather Spinoza says that "blessedness is nothing else but the contentment of spirit, which arises from the intuitive knowledge of God."
One of his biographers, Jonathan I.
Israel , argues that "No leading figure of the post-1750 later Enlightenment, for example, or the nineteenth century, was engaged with the philosophy of Descartes, Hobbes, Bayle, Locke, or Leibniz, to the degree leading figures such as Lessing , Goethe, Kant, Hegel, Fichte, Schelling, Heine, George Eliot , and Nietzsche, remained preoccupied throughout their creative lives with Spinoza."
Hegel (1770-1831) asserts that "The fact is that Spinoza is made a testing-point in modern philosophy, so that it may really be said: You are either a Spinozist or not a philosopher at all."
His expulsion from the Portuguese synagogue in 1656 has stirred debate over the years on whether he is the "first modern Jew".
Spinoza influenced discussions of the so-called Jewish question , the examination of the idea of Judaism and the modern, secular Jew.
Moses Mendelsohn , Lessing, Heine , and Kant , as well as subsequent thinkers, including Marx , Nietzsche , and Freud were influenced by Spinoza.
The changing conception of Spinoza as "the First Modern Jew" has been explicitly explored by various authors.
His expulsion has been revisited in the 21st century, with Jewish writers such Berthold Auerbach ; Salomon Rubin , who translated Spinoza's Ethics into Hebrew and saw Spinoza as a new Maimonides, penning "a new guide to the perplexed"; Zionist  Yosef Klausner , and fiction-writer Isaac Bashevis Singer shaping his image.
In 1886, the young George Santayana published "The Ethical Doctrine of Spinoza", in The Harvard Monthly .
Much later, he wrote an introduction to Spinoza's Ethics and "De Intellectus Emendatione" .
In 1932, Santayana was invited to present an essay (published as "Ultimate Religion")  at a meeting at The Hague celebrating the tricentennial of Spinoza's birth.
In Santayana's autobiography, he characterized Spinoza as his "master and model" in understanding the naturalistic basis of morality.
Philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein evoked Spinoza with the title (suggested to him by G.
E.
Moore ) of the English translation of his first definitive philosophical work, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , an allusion to Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus .
Elsewhere, Wittgenstein deliberately borrowed the expression sub specie aeternitatis from Spinoza ( Notebooks, 1914–16 , p.
83).
The structure of his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus does have some structural affinities with Spinoza's Ethics (though, admittedly, not with the Spinoza's Tractatus ) in erecting complex philosophical arguments upon basic logical propositions and principles.
In propositions 6.4311 and 6.45 he alludes to a Spinozian understanding of eternity and interpretation of the religious concept of eternal life, contending, "If by eternity is understood not eternal temporal duration, but timelessness, then he lives eternally who lives in the present."
(6.4311) "The contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its contemplation as a limited whole."
(6.45) Spinoza's philosophy played an important role in the development of post-war French philosophy .
Many of these philosophers "used Spinoza to erect a bulwark against the nominally irrationalist tendencies of phenomenology", which was associated with the dominance of Hegel , Martin Heidegger , and Edmund Husserl in France at that time.
Louis Althusser , as well as his colleagues such as Étienne Balibar , saw in Spinoza a philosophy which could lead Marxism out of what they considered to be flaws in its original formulation, particularly its reliance upon Hegel's conception of the dialectic , as well as Spinoza's concept of immanent causality.
Antonio Negri , in exile in France for much of this period, also wrote a number of books on Spinoza, most notably The Savage Anomaly (1981) in his own reconfiguration of Italian Autonomia Operaia .
Other notable French scholars of Spinoza in this period included Alexandre Matheron , Martial Gueroult , André Tosel , and Pierre Macherey , the last of whom published a widely read and influential five-volume commentary on Spinoza's Ethics , which has been described as "a monument of Spinoza commentary".
His philosophical accomplishments and moral character prompted Gilles Deleuze in his doctoral thesis (1968) to name him "the prince of philosophers".
Deleuze's interpretation of Spinoza's philosophy was highly influential among French philosophers, especially in restoring to prominence the political dimension of Spinoza's thought.
Deleuze published two books on Spinoza and gave numerous lectures on Spinoza in his capacity as a professor at the University of Paris VIII .
His own work was deeply influenced by Spinoza's philosophy, particularly the concepts of immanence and univocity .
Marilena de Souza Chaui described Deleuze's Expressionism in Philosophy (1968) as a "revolutionary work for its discovery of expression as a central concept in Spinoza's philosophy."
Einstein 1921  Albert Einstein named Spinoza as the philosopher who exerted the most influence on his world view ( Weltanschauung ).
Spinoza equated God (infinite substance) with Nature, consistent with Einstein's belief in an impersonal deity.
In 1929, Einstein was asked in a telegram by Rabbi Herbert S.
Goldstein whether he believed in God.
Einstein responded by telegram: "I believe in Spinoza's God who reveals himself in the orderly harmony of what exists, not in a God who concerns himself with the fates and actions of human beings."
Einstein wrote the preface to a biography of Spinoza, published in 1946.
Leo Strauss dedicated his first book, Spinoza's Critique of Religion , to an examination of his ideas.
Strauss identified Spinoza as part of the tradition of Enlightenment rationalism that eventually produced Modernity.
Moreover, he identifies Spinoza and his works as the beginning of Jewish Modernity.
More recently Jonathan Israel argued that, from 1650 to 1750, Spinoza was "the chief challenger of the fundamentals of revealed religion, received ideas, tradition, morality, and what was everywhere regarded, in absolutist and non-absolutist states alike, as divinely constituted political authority."
Spinoza is an important historical figure in the Netherlands , where his portrait was featured prominently on the Dutch 1000- guilder  banknote , legal tender until the euro was introduced in 2002.
The highest and most prestigious scientific award of the Netherlands is named the Spinozaprijs (Spinoza prize) .
Spinoza was included in a 50 theme canon that attempts to summarise the history of the Netherlands.
In 2014 a copy of Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus was presented to the Chair of the Dutch Parliament, and shares a shelf with the Bible and the Quran .
Modern era   Reconsideration of Spinoza's expulsion   There has been a renewed debate in modern times about Spinoza's excommunication among Israeli politicians, rabbis and Jewish press, with many calling for the cherem to be reversed.
A conference was organized at the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research in New York entitled "From Heretic to Hero: A Symposium on the Impact of Baruch Spinoza on the 350th Anniversary of His Excommunication, 1656-2006".
Presenters included Steven Nadler , Jonathan I.
Israel , Steven B.
Smith, and Daniel B.
Schwartz.
There have been calls for Spinoza's cherem to be rescinded, but it can only be done by the congregation that issued it, and the chief rabbi of that community,   Haham  Pinchas Toledano , declined to do so, citing Spinoza's "preposterous ideas, where he was tearing apart the very fundamentals of our religion",  the Amsterdam Jewish community organised a symposium in December 2015 to discuss lifting the cherem , inviting scholars from around the world to form an advisory committee at the meeting.
However, the rabbi of the congregation ruled that it should hold, on the basis that he had no greater wisdom than his predecessors, and that Spinoza's views had not become less problematic over time.
Memory and memorials   Statue (2008) of Spinoza by Nicolas Dings, Amsterdam, Zwanenburgwal , with inscription "The objective of the state is freedom" (translation, quote from Tractatus Theologico-Politicus , 1677)  Spinoza Lyceum, a high school in Amsterdam South was named after Spinoza.
There is also a 3 metre tall marble statute of him on the grounds of the school carved by Hildo Krop .
The Spinoza Havurah (a Humanistic Jewish community) was named in Spinoza's honor.
The Spinoza Foundation Monument has a statute of Spinoza located in front of the Amsterdam City Hall (at Zwanenburgwal)  It was created by Dutch sculptor Nicolas Dings and was erected in 2008.
Depictions and influence in literature   Spinoza's life and work have been subject of interest for several writers.
For example, this influence was considerably early in German literature, where Goethe makes a glowing mention of the philosopher in his memoirs, highlighting a positive influence by the Ethics in his personal life.
The same thing happened in the case of his compatriot, the poet Heine , who is also lavish in praise for Spinoza on his On the History of Religion and Philosophy in Germany (1834).
In the following century, the Argentinian Jorge Luis Borges famously wrote two sonnets in his honor ("Spinoza" in El otro, el mismo , 1964; and "Baruch Spinoza" in La moneda de hierro , 1976), and several direct references to Spinoza's philosophy can be found in this writer's work.
Also in Argentina and previously to Borges, the Ukrainian-born Jewish intellectual Alberto Gerchunoff wrote a novella about philosopher's early sentimental life, Los amores de Baruj  Spinoza (lit.
"The loves of Baruj Spinoza", 1932), recreating a supposed affair or romantic interest with Clara Maria van den Enden, daughter of his latin teacher and philosophical preceptor, Franciscus .
That is not the only fiction work where the philosopher appears as the main character.
In 1837 the German writer Berthold Auerbach dedicated to him the first novel in his series on Jewish history, translated into English in 1882 ( Spinoza: a Novel ).
Some other novels of biographical nature have appeared more recently, as The Spinoza Problem (2012; a parallel story between the philosopher's formative years, and the fascination that his work had on the Nazi leader Alfred Rosenberg ) by psychiatrist Irvin D.
Yalom , or O Segredo de Espinosa (lit.
"The Secret of Spinoza", 2023) by Portuguese journalist José Rodrigues dos Santos .
Spinoza also appear in the first novel of the Argentinian activist Andres Spokoiny , El impío (lit.
"The Impious", 2021), about the marrano phicicyst and philosopher Juan de Prado , a key influence in his biography.
Not directly his person, but his influence or legacy are themes present both in "The Spinoza of Market Street", a short story by the Polish-born Jewish-American Nobel Prize winner Isaac Bashevis Singer (originally written in yiddish in 1961), and also in the recent novel by Mexican Ezra Béjar Un Baruch para Spinoza (lit.
"A Baruch for Spinoza", 2023).
In another sense, Spinoza's philosophy is an important part of the series of satirical punk post-apocalyptic fiction novels by the French writer Jean-Bernard Pouy, begun with Spinoza encule Hegel (lit.
"Spinoza fucks Hegel ", 1983), where the protagonist take the nickname of "Spinoza" or "Spino" and projects a violent application of his thinking in a lawless world.
The series continued with two more novels, subsequently issued in 1998 and 2006.
Finally, the British art critic John Berger published some prose poems and drawings under the title of Bento's Sketchbook (2011), inspired by the Philosopher's work (from which he takes literal quotes), and in the anecdote about the existence of a drawing notebook among his belongings that disappeared after his death.
Works   Original Editions   c.
1660 .
Korte Verhandeling van God, de mensch en deszelvs welstand (unpublished until XIXth Century; A Short Treatise on God, Man and His Well-Being ; translated by A.
Wolf.
London, Adam and Charles Black Eds., 1910).
1662.
Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione ( On the Improvement of the Understanding ) (unfinished).
1663.
Principia philosophiae cartesianae ( The Principles of Cartesian Philosophy , also contains Metaphysical Thoughts / Cogitata Metaphisica ; translated by Samuel Shirley, with an Introduction and Notes by Steven Barbone and Lee Rice, Indianapolis, 1998).
1670.
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus ( A Theologico-Political Treatise ), TTP, published anonymously in his lifetime with a false place of publication.
1675–76.
Tractatus Politicus ( Political Treatise ), TP (unfinished at his death), published posthumously.
1677.
Ethica Ordine Geometrico Demonstrata ( The Ethics , finished 1674, but published posthumously, title added posthumously).
Compendium grammatices linguae hebraeae ( Hebrew Grammar , unfinished; translated with introduction by M.
J.
Bloom, London, 1963).
Epistolae ( The Letters , translated by Samuel Shirley, with an Introduction and Notes by S.
Barbone, L.
Rice and J.
Adler, Indianapolis, 1995).
Last four were originally collected and published by Spinoza's friends briefly later his death, in: B.
d.
S.
Opera Posthuma, Quorum series post Praefationem exhibetur .
(Amsterdam: Jan Rieuwertsz, 1677; both publisher and place were purposely omitted).
Simultaneously, Rieuwertsz also published a Dutch translation by Jan Hendriksz Glazemaker (who some years later translated the TTP): De Nagelate Schriften van B.
d.
S.
, without the Hebrew Grammar .
Contemporary Editions   Morgan, Michael L.
(ed.
), 2002.
Spinoza: Complete Works , with the Translation of Samuel Shirley, Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company.
ISBN  978-0-87220-620-5 .
Edwin Curley (ed.
), 1985, 2016.
The Collected Works of Spinoza (two volumes), Princeton: Princeton University Press.
(Excludes the Compendium grammatices linguae hebraeae ).
Spruit, Leen and Pina Totaro, 2011.
The Vatican Manuscript of Spinoza's Ethica , Leiden: Brill.
This is the only known surviving manuscript of Spinoza's Ethics , discovered in the Vatican archive and published in a bilingual Latin-English edition.
French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist (1596–1650)  "Descartes" redirects here.
For other uses, see Descartes (disambiguation) .
René Descartes Portrait after Frans Hals  Born 31 March 1596 ( 1596-03-31 ) La Haye en Touraine , Touraine, Kingdom of France (now Descartes, Indre-et-Loire) Died 11 February 1650 ( 1650-02-12 ) (aged 53) Stockholm , Swedish Empire Education  Collège Royal Henry-Le-Grand (1607–1614)  University of Poitiers (LL.B., 1616)  University of Franeker (no degree)  Leiden University (no degree)  Children Francine Descartes Era  17th Century  Age of Enlightenment  Region  Western philosophy  Dutch philosophy  French philosophy  School  Rationalism  Cartesianism  Mechanism  Innatism  : 257  Foundationalism   Conceptualism  : 43  Augustinianism   Indirect realism  : 136  Correspondence theory of truth   Corpuscularianism   Theological voluntarism   Thesis Untitled LL.B.
thesis (1616) Main interests Epistemology , metaphysics , mathematics , physics , cosmology , ethics Notable ideas  See list   Cogito ergo sum  Method of doubt  Subjectivity  Method of normals  Analytic geometry  Cartesian coordinate system  Imaginary number  Mind–body problem  Cartesian dualism  Interactionism  Trialism  Cartesian circle  Foundationalism  Mathesis universalis  Folium of Descartes  Deus deceptor   Dream argument  Conservation of momentum ( quantitas motus )  Balloonist theory  Descartes' Rule of Signs  Wax argument  Trademark argument  Causal adequacy principle  Res cogitans / res extensa distinction  Conatus   Signature  Part of a series on René Descartes  Philosophy  Cartesianism  Rationalism  Foundationalism  Mechanism  Doubt and certainty  Dream argument  Cogito, ergo sum  Evil demon  Trademark argument  Causal adequacy principle  Mind–body dichotomy  Analytic geometry  Coordinate system  Cartesian circle  Folium  Rule of signs  Cartesian diver  Balloonist theory  Wax argument  Res cogitans  Res extensa   Works  Rules for the Direction of the Mind  The Search for Truth  The World  Discourse on the Method  La Géométrie  Meditations on First Philosophy  Principles of Philosophy  Passions of the Soul   People  Christina, Queen of Sweden  Nicolas Malebranche  Baruch Spinoza  Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz  Francine Descartes  v t e  René Descartes ( / d eɪ ˈ k ɑːr t /  day- KART or UK : / ˈ d eɪ k ɑːr t /  DAY -kart ; French:    ⓘ ; Latinized :  Renatus Cartesius ;   31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650)    : 58 was a French philosopher , scientist , and mathematician , widely considered a seminal figure in the emergence of modern philosophy and science .
Mathematics was paramount to his method of inquiry, and he connected the previously separate fields of geometry and algebra into analytic geometry .
Descartes spent much of his working life in the Dutch Republic , initially serving the Dutch States Army , later becoming a central intellectual of the Dutch Golden Age .
Although he served a Protestant state and was later counted as a deist by critics, Descartes was Roman Catholic .
Many elements of Descartes' philosophy have precedents in late Aristotelianism , the revived Stoicism of the 16th century, or in earlier philosophers like Augustine .
In his natural philosophy , he differed from the schools on two major points.
First, he rejected the splitting of corporeal substance into matter and form; second, he rejected any appeal to final ends , divine or natural, in explaining natural phenomena.
In his theology, he insists on the absolute freedom of God's act of creation .
Refusing to accept the authority of previous philosophers, Descartes frequently set his views apart from the philosophers who preceded him.
In the opening section of the Passions of the Soul , an early modern treatise on emotions, Descartes goes so far as to assert that he will write on this topic "as if no one had written on these matters before."
His best known philosophical statement is " cogito, ergo sum " ("I think, therefore I am"; French: Je pense, donc je suis ), found in Discourse on the Method (1637, in French and Latin, 1644) and Principles of Philosophy (1644, in Latin, 1647 in French).
The statement has either been interpreted as a logical syllogism or as an intuitive thought.
Descartes has often been called the father of modern philosophy, and is largely seen as responsible for the increased attention given to epistemology in the 17th century.
He laid the foundation for 17th-century continental rationalism , later advocated by Spinoza and Leibniz , and was later opposed by the empiricist school of thought consisting of Hobbes , Locke , Berkeley , and Hume .
The rise of early modern rationalism —as a systematic school of philosophy in its own right for the first time in history—exerted an influence on modern Western thought in general, with the birth of two rationalistic philosophical systems of Descartes ( Cartesianism ) and Spinoza ( Spinozism ).
It was the 17th-century arch-rationalists like Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz who have given the " Age of Reason " its name and place in history.
Leibniz, Spinoza,  and Descartes were all well-versed in mathematics as well as philosophy, and Descartes and Leibniz contributed  to science as well.
Descartes' Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) continues to be a standard text at most university philosophy departments.
Descartes' influence in mathematics is equally apparent; the Cartesian coordinate system was named after him.
He is credited as the father of analytic geometry—used in the discovery of infinitesimal calculus and analysis .
Descartes was also one of the key figures in the Scientific Revolution .
Coat of arms of the Descartes family.
Life   Early life   The house where Descartes was born in La Haye en Touraine  René Descartes was born in La Haye en Touraine , Province of Touraine (now Descartes , Indre-et-Loire ), France, on 31 March 1596.
In May 1597, his mother Jeanne Brochard, died a few days after giving birth to a still-born child.
Descartes' father, Joachim, was a member of the Parlement of Rennes at Rennes .
: 22 René lived with his grandmother and with his great-uncle.
Although the Descartes family was Roman Catholic, the Poitou region was controlled by the Protestant Huguenots .
In 1607, late because of his fragile health, he entered the Jesuit  Collège Royal Henry-Le-Grand at La Flèche ,   where he was introduced to mathematics and physics, including Galileo 's work.
While there, Descartes first encountered hermetic mysticism.
After graduation in 1614, he studied for two years (1615–16) at the University of Poitiers , earning a Baccalauréat and Licence in canon and civil law in 1616,  in accordance with his father's wishes that he should become a lawyer.
From there, he moved to Paris.
Graduation registry for Descartes at the University of Poitiers , 1616  In Discourse on the Method , Descartes recalls:  : 20–21   I entirely abandoned the study of letters.
Resolving to seek no knowledge other than that of which could be found in myself or else in the great book of the world, I spent the rest of my youth traveling, visiting courts and armies, mixing with people of diverse temperaments and ranks, gathering various experiences, testing myself in the situations which fortune offered me, and at all times reflecting upon whatever came my way to derive some profit from it.
Army service   See also: § Mechanical philosophy  In accordance with his ambition to become a professional military officer in 1618, Descartes joined, as a mercenary , the Protestant  Dutch States Army in Breda under the command of Maurice of Nassau ,  and undertook a formal study of military engineering , as established by Simon Stevin .
Descartes, therefore, received much encouragement in Breda to advance his knowledge of mathematics.
In this way, he became acquainted with Isaac Beeckman ,  the principal of a Dordrecht school, for whom he wrote the Compendium of Music (written 1618, published 1650).
While in the service of the Catholic Duke Maximilian of Bavaria from 1619,  Descartes was present at the Battle of the White Mountain near Prague , in November 1620.
According to Adrien Baillet , on the night of 10–11 November 1619 ( St. Martin's Day ), while stationed in Neuburg an der Donau , Descartes shut himself in a room with an "oven" (probably a cocklestove )  to escape the cold.
While within, he had three dreams,  and believed that a divine spirit revealed to him a new philosophy.
However, it is speculated that what Descartes considered to be his second dream was actually an episode of exploding head syndrome .
Upon exiting, he had formulated analytic geometry and the idea of applying the mathematical method to philosophy.
He concluded from these visions that the pursuit of science would prove to be, for him, the pursuit of true wisdom and a central part of his life's work.
Descartes also saw very clearly that all truths were linked with one another, so that finding a fundamental truth and proceeding with logic would open the way to all science.
Descartes discovered this basic truth quite soon: his famous " I think, therefore I am ."
Career   France   In 1620, Descartes left the army.
He visited Basilica della Santa Casa in Loreto, then visited various countries before returning to France, and during the next few years, he spent time in Paris.
It was there that he composed his first essay on method: Regulae ad Directionem Ingenii ( Rules for the Direction of the Mind ).
He arrived in La Haye in 1623, selling all of his property to invest in bonds , which provided a comfortable income for the rest of his life.
: 94 Descartes was present at the siege of La Rochelle by Cardinal Richelieu in 1627 as an observer.
: 128 There, he was interested in the physical properties of the great dike that Richelieu was building and studied mathematically everything he saw during the siege.
He also met French mathematician Girard Desargues .
In the autumn of that year, in the residence of the papal nuncio  Guidi di Bagno , where he came with Mersenne and many other scholars to listen to a lecture given by the alchemist, Nicolas de Villiers, Sieur de Chandoux, on the principles of a supposed new philosophy,  Cardinal Bérulle urged him to write an exposition of his new philosophy in some location beyond the reach of the Inquisition.
Netherlands   In Amsterdam , Descartes lived at Westermarkt 6 (Maison Descartes, left).
Title page of " Principia philosophiae " ( Principles of Philosophy ), 1656  Descartes returned to the Dutch Republic in 1628.
In April 1629, he joined the University of Franeker , studying under Adriaan Metius , either living with a Catholic family or renting the Sjaerdemaslot .
The next year, under the name "Poitevin", he enrolled at Leiden University , which at the time was a Protestant University.
He studied both mathematics with Jacobus Golius , who confronted him with Pappus's hexagon theorem , and astronomy with Martin Hortensius .
In October 1630, he had a falling-out with Beeckman, whom he accused of plagiarizing some of his ideas.
In Amsterdam, he had a relationship with a servant girl, Helena Jans van der Strom, with whom he had a daughter, Francine , who was born in 1635 in Deventer .
She was baptized a Protestant   and died of scarlet fever at the age of 5.
Unlike many moralists of the time, Descartes did not deprecate the passions but rather defended them;  he wept upon Francine's death in 1640.
According to a recent biography by Jason Porterfield, "Descartes said that he did not believe that one must refrain from tears to prove oneself a man."
Russell Shorto speculates that the experience of fatherhood and losing a child formed a turning point in Descartes' work, changing its focus from medicine to a quest for universal answers.
Despite frequent moves,  he wrote all of his major work during his 20-plus years in the Netherlands, initiating a revolution in mathematics and philosophy.
In 1633, Galileo was condemned by the Italian Inquisition , and Descartes abandoned plans to publish Treatise on the World , his work of the previous four years.
Nevertheless, in 1637, he published parts of this work in three essays:  "Les Météores" (The Meteors), " La Dioptrique " (Dioptrics) and La Géométrie ( Geometry ), preceded by an introduction, his famous Discours de la méthode ( Discourse on the Method ).
In it, Descartes lays out four rules of thought, meant to ensure that our knowledge rests upon a firm foundation:    The first was never to accept anything for true which I did not know to be such; that is to say, carefully to avoid precipitancy and prejudice, and to comprise nothing more in my judgment than what was presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly as to exclude all ground of doubt.
In La Géométrie , Descartes exploited the discoveries he made with Pierre de Fermat .
This later became known as Cartesian Geometry.
Descartes continued to publish works concerning both mathematics and philosophy for the rest of his life.
In 1641, he published a metaphysics treatise, Meditationes de Prima Philosophia ( Meditations on First Philosophy ), written in Latin and thus addressed to the learned.
It was followed in 1644 by Principia Philosophiae ( Principles of Philosophy ), a kind of synthesis of the Discourse on the Method and Meditations on First Philosophy .
In 1643, Cartesian philosophy was condemned at the University of Utrecht , and Descartes was obliged to flee to the Hague, settling in Egmond-Binnen .
Between 1643 and 1649 Descartes lived with his girlfriend at Egmond-Binnen in an inn.
Descartes became friendly with Anthony Studler van Zurck, lord of Bergen and participated in the design of his mansion and estate.
He also met Dirck Rembrantsz van Nierop , a mathematician and surveyor .
He was so impressed by Van Nierop's knowledge that he even brought him to the attention of Constantijn Huygens and Frans van Schooten.
Christia Mercer suggested that Descartes may have been influenced by Spanish author and Roman Catholic nun Teresa of Ávila , who, fifty years earlier, published The Interior Castle , concerning the role of philosophical reflection in intellectual growth.
Descartes began (through Alfonso Polloti, an Italian general in Dutch service) a six-year correspondence with Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia , devoted mainly to moral and psychological subjects.
Connected with this correspondence, in 1649 he published Les Passions de l'âme ( The Passions of the Soul ), which he dedicated to the Princess.
A French translation of Principia Philosophiae , prepared by Abbot Claude Picot, was published in 1647.
This edition was also dedicated to Princess Elisabeth.
In the preface to the French edition , Descartes praised true philosophy as a means to attain wisdom.
He identifies four ordinary sources to reach wisdom and finally says that there is a fifth, better and more secure, consisting in the search for first causes.
Sweden   Descartes in conversation with Queen Christina in Stockholm  By 1649, Descartes had become one of Europe's most famous philosophers and scientists.
That year, Queen Christina of Sweden invited him to her court to organize a new scientific academy and tutor her in his ideas about love.
Descartes accepted, and moved to the Swedish Empire in the middle of winter.
Christina was interested in and stimulated Descartes to publish The Passions of the Soul .
He was a guest at the house of Pierre Chanut , living on Västerlånggatan , less than 500 meters from Castle Tre Kronor in Stockholm .
There, Chanut and Descartes made observations with a Torricellian mercury barometer.
Challenging Blaise Pascal , Descartes took the first set of barometric readings in Stockholm to see if atmospheric pressure could be used in forecasting the weather.
Death   Descartes arranged to give lessons to Queen Christina after her birthday, three times a week at 5 am, in her cold and draughty castle.
However, by 15 January 1650 the Queen had actually met with Descartes only four or five times.
It soon became clear they did not like each other; she did not care for his mechanical philosophy , nor did he share her interest in Ancient Greek language and literature .
On 1 February 1650, he contracted pneumonia and died on 11 February at Chanut.
"Yesterday morning about four o'clock a.m. has deceased here at the house of His Excellency Mr. Chanut, French ambassador, Mr. Descartes.
As I have been informed, he had been ill for a few days with pleurisy.
But as he did not want to take or use medicines, a hot fever appears to have arisen as well.
Thereupon, he had himself bled three times in one day, but without operation of losing much blood.
Her Majesty much bemoaned his decease, because he was such a learned man.
He has been cast in wax.
It was not his intention to die here, as he had resolved shortly before his death to return to Holland at the first occasion.
Etc."
The cause of death was pneumonia according to Chanut, but peripneumonia according to Christina's physician Johann van Wullen who was not allowed to bleed him.
(The winter seems to have been mild,  except for the second half of January which was harsh as described by Descartes himself; however, "this remark was probably intended to be as much Descartes' take on the intellectual climate as it was about the weather.")
(left) The tomb of Descartes (middle, with detail of the inscription), in the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés , Paris; (right) memorial to Descartes, erected in the 1720s, in the Adolf Fredriks kyrka  E.
Pies has questioned this account, based on a letter by the Doctor van Wullen; however, Descartes had refused his treatment, and more arguments against its veracity have been raised since.
In a 2009 book, German philosopher Theodor Ebert argues that Descartes was poisoned by Jacques Viogué, a Catholic missionary who opposed his religious views.
As evidence, Ebert suggests that Catherine Descartes , the niece of René Descartes, made a veiled reference to the act of poisoning when her uncle was administered "communion" two days before his death, in her Report on the Death of M.
Descartes, the Philosopher (1693).
As a Catholic    in a Protestant nation, he was interred in the churchyard of what was to become Adolf Fredrik Church in Stockholm, where mainly orphans had been buried.
His manuscripts came into the possession of Claude Clerselier , Chanut's brother-in-law, and "a devout Catholic who has begun the process of turning Descartes into a saint by cutting, adding and publishing his letters selectively."
: 137–154 In 1663, the Pope placed Descartes' works on the Index of Prohibited Books .
In 1666, sixteen years after his death, his remains were taken to France and buried in Saint-Étienne-du-Mont .
In 1671, Louis XIV prohibited all lectures in Cartesianism .
Although the National Convention in 1792 had planned to transfer his remains to the Panthéon , he was reburied in the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés in 1819, missing a finger and the skull.
His skull is in the Musée de l'Homme in Paris.
Philosophical work   René Descartes at work  Further information: Cartesianism  In his Discourse on the Method , he attempts to arrive at a fundamental set of principles that one can know as true without any doubt.
To achieve this, he employs a method called hyperbolical/metaphysical doubt, also sometimes referred to as methodological skepticism or Cartesian doubt : he rejects any ideas that can be doubted and then re-establishes them in order to acquire a firm foundation for genuine knowledge.
Descartes built his ideas from scratch which he does in The Meditations on First Philosophy .
He relates this to architecture: the top soil is taken away to create a new building or structure.
Descartes calls his doubt the soil and new knowledge the buildings.
To Descartes, Aristotle's foundationalism is incomplete and his method of doubt enhances foundationalism.
Initially, Descartes arrives at only a single first principle: he thinks.
This is expressed in the Latin phrase in the Discourse on Method " Cogito, ergo sum " (English: "I think, therefore I am").
Descartes concluded, if he doubted, then something or someone must be doing the doubting; therefore, the very fact that he doubted proved his existence.
"The simple meaning of the phrase is that if one is skeptical of existence, that is in and of itself proof that he does exist."
These two first principles—I think and I exist—were later confirmed by Descartes' clear and distinct perception (delineated in his Third Meditation from The Meditations ): as he clearly and distinctly perceives these two principles, Descartes reasoned, ensures their indubitability.
Descartes concludes that he can be certain that he exists because he thinks.
But in what form?
He perceives his body through the use of the senses; however, these have previously been unreliable.
So Descartes determines that the only indubitable knowledge is that he is a thinking thing .
Thinking is what he does, and his power must come from his essence.
Descartes defines "thought" ( cogitatio ) as "what happens in me such that I am immediately conscious of it, insofar as I am conscious of it".
Thinking is thus every activity of a person of which the person is immediately conscious .
He gave reasons for thinking that waking thoughts are distinguishable from dreams , and that one's mind cannot have been "hijacked" by an evil demon placing an illusory external world before one's senses.
And so something that I thought I was seeing with my eyes is grasped solely by the faculty of judgment which is in my mind.
: 109  In this manner, Descartes proceeds to construct a system of knowledge, discarding perception as unreliable and, instead, admitting only deduction as a method.
Mind–body dualism   Further information: Mind–body problem and Mind–body dualism  L'homme (1664)  Descartes, influenced by the automatons on display at the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye near Paris, investigated the connection between mind and body, and how they interact.
His main influences for dualism were theology and physics .
The theory on the dualism of mind and body is Descartes' signature doctrine and permeates other theories he advanced.
Known as Cartesian dualism (or mind–body dualism), his theory on the separation between the mind and the body went on to influence subsequent Western philosophies.
In Meditations on First Philosophy , Descartes attempted to demonstrate the existence of God and the distinction between the human soul and the body.
Humans are a union of mind and body;  thus Descartes' dualism embraced the idea that mind and body are distinct but closely joined.
While many contemporary readers of Descartes found the distinction between mind and body difficult to grasp, he thought it was entirely straightforward.
Descartes employed the concept of modes , which are the ways in which substances exist.
In Principles of Philosophy , Descartes explained, "we can clearly perceive a substance apart from the mode which we say differs from it, whereas we cannot, conversely, understand the mode apart from the substance".
To perceive a mode apart from its substance requires an intellectual abstraction,  which Descartes explained as follows:  The intellectual abstraction consists in my turning my thought away from one part of the contents of this richer idea the better to apply it to the other part with greater attention.
Thus, when I consider a shape without thinking of the substance or the extension whose shape it is, I make a mental abstraction.
According to Descartes, two substances are really distinct when each of them can exist apart from the other.
Thus, Descartes reasoned that God is distinct from humans, and the body and mind of a human are also distinct from one another.
He argued that the great differences between body (an extended thing) and mind (an un-extended, immaterial thing) make the two ontologically distinct.
According to Descartes' indivisibility argument, the mind is utterly indivisible: because "when I consider the mind, or myself in so far as I am merely a thinking thing, I am unable to distinguish any part within myself; I understand myself to be something quite single and complete."
Moreover, in The Meditations , Descartes discusses a piece of wax and exposes the single most characteristic doctrine of Cartesian dualism: that the universe contained two radically different kinds of substances—the mind or soul defined as thinking , and the body defined as matter and unthinking.
The Aristotelian philosophy of Descartes' days held that the universe was inherently purposeful or teleological.
Everything that happened, be it the motion of the stars or the growth of a tree , was supposedly explainable by a certain purpose, goal or end that worked its way out within nature.
Aristotle called this the "final cause", and these final causes were indispensable for explaining the ways nature operated.
Descartes' theory of dualism supports the distinction between traditional Aristotelian science and the new science of Kepler and Galileo, which denied the role of a divine power and "final causes" in its attempts to explain nature.
Descartes' dualism provided the philosophical rationale for the latter by expelling the final cause from the physical universe (or res extensa ) in favor of the mind (or res cogitans ).
Therefore, while Cartesian dualism paved the way for modern physics , it also held the door open for religious beliefs about the immortality of the soul .
Descartes' dualism of mind and matter implied a concept of human beings.
A human was, according to Descartes, a composite entity of mind and body.
Descartes gave priority to the mind and argued that the mind could exist without the body, but the body could not exist without the mind.
In The Meditations , Descartes even argues that while the mind is a substance, the body is composed only of "accidents".
But he did argue that mind and body are closely joined:    Nature also teaches me, by the sensations of pain, hunger, thirst and so on, that I am not merely present in my body as a pilot in his ship, but that I am very closely joined and, as it were, intermingled with it, so that I and the body form a unit.
If this were not so, I, who am nothing but a thinking thing, would not feel pain when the body was hurt, but would perceive the damage purely by the intellect, just as a sailor perceives by sight if anything in his ship is broken.
Descartes' discussion on embodiment raised one of the most perplexing problems of his dualism philosophy: What exactly is the relationship of union between the mind and the body of a person?
Therefore, Cartesian dualism set the agenda for philosophical discussion of the mind–body problem for many years after Descartes' death.
Descartes was also a rationalist and believed in the power of innate ideas .
Descartes argued the theory of innate knowledge and that all humans were born with knowledge through the higher power of God.
It was this theory of innate knowledge that was later combated by philosopher John Locke (1632–1704), an empiricist.
Empiricism holds that all knowledge is acquired through experience.
Physiology and psychology   In The Passions of the Soul , published in 1649,  Descartes discussed the common contemporary belief that the human body contained animal spirits.
These animal spirits were believed to be light and roaming fluids circulating rapidly around the nervous system between the brain and the muscles.
These animal spirits were believed to affect the human soul, or passions of the soul.
Descartes distinguished six basic passions: wonder, love, hatred, desire, joy and sadness.
All of these passions, he argued, represented different combinations of the original spirit, and influenced the soul to will or want certain actions.
He argued, for example, that fear is a passion that moves the soul to generate a response in the body.
In line with his dualist teachings on the separation between the soul and the body, he hypothesized that some part of the brain served as a connector between the soul and the body and singled out the pineal gland as connector.
Descartes argued that signals passed from the ear and the eye to the pineal gland, through animal spirits.
Thus different motions in the gland cause various animal spirits.
He argued that these motions in the pineal gland are based on God's will and that humans are supposed to want and like things that are useful to them.
But he also argued that the animal spirits that moved around the body could distort the commands from the pineal gland, thus humans had to learn how to control their passions.
Descartes advanced a theory on automatic bodily reactions to external events, which influenced 19th-century reflex theory.
He argued that external motions, such as touch and sound, reach the endings of the nerves and affect the animal spirits.
For example, heat from fire affects a spot on the skin and sets in motion a chain of reactions, with the animal spirits reaching the brain through the central nervous system, and in turn, animal spirits are sent back to the muscles to move the hand away from the fire.
Through this chain of reactions, the automatic reactions of the body do not require a thought process.
Above all, he was among the first scientists who believed that the soul should be subject to scientific investigation.
He challenged the views of his contemporaries that the soul was divine , thus religious authorities regarded his books as dangerous.
Descartes' writings went on to form the basis for theories on emotions and how cognitive evaluations were translated into affective processes.
Descartes believed the brain resembled a working machine and that mathematics, and mechanics could explain complicated processes in it.
In the 20th century, Alan Turing advanced computer science based on mathematical biology as inspired by Descartes.
His theories on reflexes also served as the foundation for advanced physiological theories , more than 200 years after his death.
The physiologist Ivan Pavlov was a great admirer of Descartes.
On animals   Descartes denied that animals had reason or intelligence.
He argued that animals did not lack sensations or perceptions, but these could be explained mechanistically.
Whereas humans had a soul, or mind, and were able to feel pain and anxiety , animals by virtue of not having a soul could not feel pain or anxiety.
If animals showed signs of distress then this was to protect the body from damage, but the innate state needed for them to suffer was absent.
Although Descartes's views were not universally accepted, they became prominent in Europe and North America, allowing humans to treat animals with impunity.
The view that animals were quite separate from humanity and merely machines allowed for the maltreatment of animals , and was sanctioned in law and societal norms until the middle of the 19th century.
: 180–214 The publications of Charles Darwin would eventually erode the Cartesian view of animals.
: 37 Darwin argued that the continuity between humans and other species suggested the possibility of animal suffering.
: 177   Moral philosophy   For Descartes, ethics was a science, the highest and most perfect of them.
Like the rest of the sciences, ethics had its roots in metaphysics.
In this way, he argues for the existence of God, investigates the place of man in nature, formulates the theory of mind–body dualism, and defends free will .
However, as he was a convinced rationalist, Descartes clearly states that reason is sufficient in the search for the goods that individuals should seek, and virtue consists in the correct reasoning that should guide their actions.
Nevertheless, the quality of this reasoning depends on knowledge and mental condition.
For this reason, he said that a complete moral philosophy should include the study of the body.
: 189 He discussed this subject in the correspondence with Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia , and as a result wrote his work The Passions of the Soul , that contains a study of the psychosomatic processes and reactions in man, with an emphasis on emotions or passions.
His works about human passion and emotion would be the basis for the philosophy of his followers (see Cartesianism ), and would have a lasting impact on ideas concerning what literature and art should be, specifically how it should invoke emotion.
Descartes and Zeno both identified sovereign goods with virtue.
For Epicurus , the sovereign good was pleasure, and Descartes says that, in fact, this is not in contradiction with Zeno's teaching, because virtue produces a spiritual pleasure that is better than bodily pleasure.
Regarding Aristotle 's opinion that happiness (eudaimonia) depends on both moral virtue and also on the goods of fortune such as a moderate degree of wealth, Descartes does not deny that fortunes contributes to happiness, but remarks that they are in great proportion outside one's own control, whereas one's mind is under one's complete control.
The moral writings of Descartes came at the last part of his life, but earlier, in his Discourse on the Method , he adopted three maxims to be able to act while he put all his ideas into doubt.
Those maxims are known as his "Provisional Morals" .
Religion   Part of a series on Catholic philosophy   Aquinas , Scotus , and Ockham  Ethics  Cardinal virtues  Just price  Just war  Principle of Double Effect  Probabilism  Natural law  Personalism  Social teaching  Liberation Theology  Christian Humanism  Virtue ethics  Works of mercy   Metaphysics  Conceptualism  Realism  Moderate realism  Nominalism  Quiddity ( essence / nature )  Haecceity  Quinque Viae  Predestination  Theological determinism  Compatibilism  Divine Attributes   Schools  Augustinianism  Victorines  Llullism  Cartesianism  Christian Neoplatonism  Friends of God  Molinism  Ressourcement  Occamism  Scholasticism  Second scholasticism  Neo  Scotism  Thomism  Analytic  Salamanca   Philosophers  Ancient  Ambrose  Athanasius  Augustine  Benedict  Boethius  Clement  Cyprian  Cyril  Gregory (of Nazianzus)  Gregory (of Nyssa)  Irenaeus  Jerome  Cassian  Chrysostom  Climacus  John of Damascus  Justin  Maximus  Dionysius  Origen  Paul  Tertullian    Medieval  Abelard  Albert  Anselm  Aquinas  Bacon  Bede  Berengar  Bernard  Bonaventure  Buridan  Catherine  Eckhart  Eriugena  Giles  Gregory I  Gundissalinus  Hildegard  Hugh  Isidore  Llull  Lombard  Martin  Nicholas  Ockham  Oresme  Paschasius  Roscellinus  Scotus  Symeon  Thierry    Modern  Arnauld  Ávila  Azpilcueta  Bellarmine  Bonald  Bossuet  Brentano  Botero  Cajetan  Chateaubriand  Cortés  Descartes  Erasmus  Fénelon  Gracián  Kołłątaj  Krasicki  La Mennais  Liguori  Maistre  Malebranche  Mariana  Meinong  Mercado  Molina  More  Newman  Pascal  Rosmini  Sales  Soto  Suárez  Vico  Vitoria  Caramuel    Contemporary  Adler  Anscombe  Balthasar  Barron  Benedict XVI  Blondel  Chesterton  Congar  Copleston  Finnis  Garrigou-Lagrange  Geach  Gilson  Girard  Gutiérrez  Dávila  Guardini  Haldane  Hildebrand  John Paul II  Lonergan  Lubac  MacIntyre  Marcel  Marion  Maritain  McLuhan  Mounier  Pieper  Rahner  Stein  Taylor      Catholicism portal  Philosophy portal v t e  In the third and fifth Meditation , Descartes offers proofs of a benevolent God (the trademark argument and the ontological argument respectively).
Descartes has faith in the account of reality his senses provide him, since he believed that God provided him with a working mind and sensory system and does not desire to deceive him.
From this supposition, however, Descartes finally establishes the possibility of acquiring knowledge about the world based on deduction and perception.
Regarding epistemology , therefore, Descartes can be said to have contributed such ideas as a conception of foundationalism and the possibility that reason is the only reliable method of attaining knowledge.
Descartes, however, was very much aware that experimentation was necessary to verify and validate theories.
Descartes invokes his causal adequacy principle  to support his trademark argument for the existence of God, quoting Lucretius in defence: "Ex nihilo nihil fit" , meaning " Nothing comes from nothing " ( Lucretius ).
Oxford Reference summarises the argument, as follows, "that our idea of perfection is related to its perfect origin (God), just as a stamp or trademark is left in an article of workmanship by its maker."
In the fifth Meditation, Descartes presents a version of the ontological argument which is founded on the possibility of thinking the "idea of a being that is supremely perfect and infinite," and suggests that "of all the ideas that are in me, the idea that I have of God is the most true, the most clear and distinct."
Descartes considered himself to be a devout Catholic,    and one of the purposes of the Meditations was to defend the Catholic faith.
His attempt to ground theological beliefs on reason encountered intense opposition in his time.
Pascal regarded Descartes' views as a rationalist and mechanist, and accused him of deism : "I cannot forgive Descartes; in all his philosophy, Descartes did his best to dispense with God.
But Descartes could not avoid prodding God to set the world in motion with a snap of his lordly fingers; after that, he had no more use for God," while a powerful contemporary, Martin Schoock , accused him of atheist beliefs, though Descartes had provided an explicit critique of atheism in his Meditations .
The Catholic Church prohibited his books in 1663.
   : 274  Descartes also wrote a response to external world skepticism .
Through this method of skepticism, he does not doubt for the sake of doubting but to achieve concrete and reliable information.
In other words, certainty.
He argues that sensory perceptions come to him involuntarily, and are not willed by him.
They are external to his senses, and according to Descartes, this is evidence of the existence of something outside of his mind, and thus, an external world.
Descartes goes on to argue that the things in the external world are material by arguing that God would not deceive him as to the ideas that are being transmitted, and that God has given him the "propensity" to believe that such ideas are caused by material things.
Descartes also believes a substance is something that does not need any assistance to function or exist.
Descartes further explains how only God can be a true "substance".
But minds are substances, meaning they need only God for it to function.
The mind is a thinking substance.
The means for a thinking substance stem from ideas.
Descartes steered clear of theological questions, restricting his attention to showing that there is no incompatibility between his metaphysics and theological orthodoxy.
He avoided trying to demonstrate theological dogmas metaphysically.
When challenged that he had not established the immortality of the soul merely in showing that the soul and the body are distinct substances, he replied, "I do not take it upon myself to try to use the power of human reason to settle any of those matters which depend on the free will of God."
Mathematics   x for unknown; exponential notation   Main article: Exponentiation § History  Descartes "invented the convention of representing unknowns in equations by x , y , and z , and knowns by a , b , and c ".
He also "pioneered the standard notation" that uses superscripts to show the powers or exponents; for example, the 2 used in x 2 to indicate x squared.
: 19   Analytic geometry   Main article: Analytic geometry  See also: Equation § Analytic geometry , and Algebraic geometry § History A Cartesian coordinates graph, using his invented x and y axes  One of Descartes' most enduring legacies was his development of Cartesian or analytic geometry , which uses algebra to describe geometry.
He was first to assign a fundamental place for algebra in the system of knowledge, using it as a method to automate or mechanize reasoning, particularly about abstract, unknown quantities.
: 91–114 European mathematicians had previously viewed geometry as a more fundamental form of mathematics, serving as the foundation of algebra.
Algebraic rules were given geometric proofs by mathematicians such as Pacioli , Cardano , Tartaglia and Ferrari .
Equations of degree higher than the third were regarded as unreal, because a three-dimensional form, such as a cube, occupied the largest dimension of reality.
Descartes professed that the abstract quantity a 2 could represent length as well as an area.
This was in opposition to the teachings of mathematicians such as François Viète , who insisted that a second power must represent an area.
Although Descartes did not pursue the subject, he preceded Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in envisioning a more general science of algebra or "universal mathematics", as a precursor to symbolic logic , that could encompass logical principles and methods symbolically, and mechanize general reasoning.
: 280–281   Influence on Newton's mathematics   Current popular opinion holds that Descartes had the most influence of anyone on the young Isaac Newton , and this is arguably one of his most important contributions.
Descartes' influence extended not directly from his original French edition of La Géométrie , however, but rather from Frans van Schooten 's expanded second Latin edition of the work.
: 100 Newton continued Descartes' work on cubic equations , which freed the subject from fetters of the Greek perspectives.
The most important concept was his very modern treatment of single variables.
: 109–129   The basis of calculus   Descartes' work provided the basis for the calculus developed by Leibniz and Newton , who applied the infinitesimal calculus to the tangent line problem , thus permitting the evolution of that branch of modern mathematics.
His rule of signs is also a commonly used method to determine the number of positive and negative roots of a polynomial.
Physics   Philosophy, metaphysics, and physics   Descartes is often regarded as the first thinker to emphasize the use of reason to develop the natural sciences .
For him, philosophy was a thinking system that embodied all knowledge, as he related in a letter to a French translator:    Thus, all Philosophy is like a tree, of which Metaphysics is the root, Physics the trunk, and all the other sciences the branches that grow out of this trunk, which are reduced to three principals, namely, Medicine, Mechanics, and Ethics.
By the science of Morals, I understand the highest and most perfect which, presupposing an entire knowledge of the other sciences, is the last degree of wisdom.
Mechanics   Mechanical philosophy   Main article: Mechanism (philosophy) § Mechanical philosophy See also: § Army service , and Corpuscularianism  The beginning to Descartes' interest in physics is accredited to the amateur scientist and mathematician Isaac Beeckman , whom he met in 1618, and who was at the forefront of a new school of thought known as mechanical philosophy .
With this foundation of reasoning, Descartes formulated many of his theories on mechanical and geometric physics .
It is said that they met when both were looking at a placard that was set up in the Breda marketplace, detailing a mathematical problem to be solved.
Descartes asked Beeckman to translate the problem from Dutch to French.
In their following meetings Beeckman interested Descartes in his corpuscularian approach to mechanical theory, and convinced him to devote his studies to a mathematical approach to nature.
In 1628, Beeckman also introduced him to many of Galileo 's ideas.
Together, they worked on free fall , catenaries , conic sections , and fluid statics .
Both believed that it was necessary to create a method that thoroughly linked mathematics and physics.
Anticipating the concept of work   Although the concept of work (in physics) was not formally used until 1826, similar concepts existed before then.
In 1637, Descartes wrote:    Lifting 100 lb one foot twice over is the same as lifting 200 lb one foot, or 100 lb two feet.
— René Descartes, Letter to Huygens  Conservation of motion   Main article: Momentum § History of the concept In Principles of Philosophy ( Principia Philosophiae ) from 1644 Descartes outlined his views on the universe.
In it he describes his three laws of motion .
( Newton's own laws of motion would later be modeled on Descartes' exposition.)
Descartes defined "quantity of motion" ( Latin : quantitas motus ) as the product of size and speed,  and claimed that the total quantity of motion in the universe is conserved.
If x is twice the size of y, and is moving half as fast, then there's the same amount of motion in each.
created matter, along with its motion ...
merely by letting things run their course, he preserves the same amount of motion ...
as he put there in the beginning.
— René Descartes, Principles of Philosophy, Part 2: The principles of material things Descartes had discovered an early form of the law of conservation of momentum .
He envisioned quantity of motion as pertaining to motion in a straight line, as opposed to perfect circular motion, as Galileo had envisioned it.
Descartes' discovery should not be seen as the modern law of conservation of momentum, since had no concept of mass as distinct from weight or size, and since he believed that it is speed rather than velocity that is conserved.
Planetary motion   Descartes' vortex theory of planetary motion was later rejected by Newton in favor of his law of universal gravitation , and most of the second book of Newton's Principia is devoted to his counterargument.
Optics   Descartes also made contributions to the field of optics .
He showed by using geometric construction and the law of refraction (also known as Descartes' law, or more commonly Snell's law outside France) that the angular radius of a rainbow is 42 degrees (i.e., the angle subtended at the eye by the edge of the rainbow and the ray passing from the sun through the rainbow's centre is 42°).
He also independently discovered the law of reflection , and his essay on optics was the first published mention of this law.
Meteorology   Within Discourse on the Method , there is an appendix in which Descartes discusses his theories on Meteorology known as Les Météores .
He first proposed the idea that the elements were made up of small particles that join together imperfectly, thus leaving small spaces in between.
These spaces were then filled with smaller much quicker "subtile matter".
These particles were different based on what element they constructed, for example, Descartes believed that particles of water were "like little eels, which, though they join and twist around each other, do not, for all that, ever knot or hook together in such a way that they cannot easily be separated."
In contrast, the particles that made up the more solid material, were constructed in a way that generated irregular shapes.
The size of the particle also matters, if the particle was smaller, not only was it faster and constantly moving, it was more easily agitated by the larger particles, which were slow but had more force.
The different qualities, such as combinations and shapes, gave rise to different secondary qualities of materials, such as temperature.
This first idea is the basis for the rest of Descartes' theory on Meteorology.
While rejecting most of Aristotle 's theories on Meteorology, he still kept some of the terminology that Aristotle used such as vapors and exhalations.
These "vapors" would be drawn into the sky by the sun from "terrestrial substances" and would generate wind.
Descartes also theorized that falling clouds would displace the air below them, also generating wind.
Falling clouds could also generate thunder.
He theorized that when a cloud rests above another cloud and the air around the top cloud is hot, it condenses the vapor around the top cloud, and causes the particles to fall.
When the particles falling from the top cloud collided with the bottom cloud's particles it would create thunder.
He compared his theory on thunder to his theory on avalanches.
Descartes believed that the booming sound that avalanches created, was due to snow that was heated, and therefore heavier, falling onto the snow that was below it.
This theory was supported by experience "It follows that one can understand why it thunders more rarely in winter than in summer; for then not enough heat reaches the highest clouds, in order to break them up."
Another theory that Descartes had was on the production of lightning.
Descartes believed that lightning was caused by exhalations trapped between the two colliding clouds.
He believed that in order to make these exhalations viable to produce lightning, they had to be made "fine and inflammable" by hot and dry weather.
Whenever the clouds would collide it would cause them to ignite creating lightning, if the cloud above was heavier than the bottom cloud it would also produce thunder.
Descartes also believed that clouds were made up of drops of water and ice, and believed that rain would fall whenever the air could no longer support them.
It would fall as snow if the air was not warm enough to melt the raindrops.
And hail was when the cloud drops would melt, and then freeze again because cold air would refreeze them.
Descartes did not use mathematics or instruments (as there were not any at the time) to back up his theories on Meteorology and instead used qualitative reasoning in order to deduce his hypothesis.
Historical impact   Emancipation from Church doctrine   Cover of Meditations  Descartes has often been dubbed the father of modern Western philosophy , the thinker whose approaches has profoundly changed the course of Western philosophy and set the basis for modernity .
The first two of his Meditations on First Philosophy , those that formulate the famous methodic doubt, represent the portion of Descartes' writings that most influenced modern thinking.
It has been argued that Descartes himself did not realize the extent of this revolutionary move.
In shifting the debate from "what is true" to "of what can I be certain?
", Descartes arguably shifted the authoritative guarantor of truth from God to humanity (even though Descartes himself claimed he received his visions from God)—while the traditional concept of "truth" implies an external authority, "certainty" instead relies on the judgment of the individual.
In an anthropocentric revolution, the human being is now raised to the level of a subject, an agent, an emancipated being equipped with autonomous reason.
This was a revolutionary step that established the basis of modernity, the repercussions of which are still being felt: the emancipation of humanity from Christian revelational truth and Church doctrine ; humanity making its own law and taking its own stand.
In modernity, the guarantor of truth is not God anymore but human beings, each of whom is a "self-conscious shaper and guarantor" of their own reality.
In that way, each person is turned into a reasoning adult, a subject and agent,  as opposed to a child obedient to God.
This change in perspective was characteristic of the shift from the Christian medieval period to the modern period, a shift that had been anticipated in other fields, and which was now being formulated in the field of philosophy by Descartes.
This anthropocentric perspective of Descartes' work, establishing human reason as autonomous, provided the basis for the Enlightenment 's emancipation from God and the Church.
According to Martin Heidegger , the perspective of Descartes' work also provided the basis for all subsequent anthropology .
Descartes' philosophical revolution is sometimes said to have sparked modern anthropocentrism and subjectivism .
Contemporary reception   In commercial terms, The Discourse appeared during Descartes' lifetime in a single edition of 500 copies, 200 of which were set aside for the author.
Sharing a similar fate was the only French edition of The Meditations , which had not managed to sell out by the time of Descartes' death.
A concomitant Latin edition of the latter was, however, eagerly sought out by Europe's scholarly community and proved a commercial success for Descartes.
: xliii–xliv  Although Descartes was well known in academic circles towards the end of his life, the teaching of his works in schools was controversial.
Henri de Roy ( Henricus Regius , 1598–1679), Professor of Medicine at the University of Utrecht, was condemned by the Rector of the university, Gijsbert Voet (Voetius), for teaching Descartes' physics.
According to philosophy professor John Cottingham , Descartes's Meditations on First Philosophy is considered to be "one of the key texts of Western philosophy".
Cottingham said that the Meditations is the "most widely studied of all Descartes' writings".
: 50  According to Anthony Gottlieb , a former senior editor of The Economist , and the author of The Dream of Reason and The Dream of Enlightenment , one of the reasons Descartes and Thomas Hobbes continue to be debated in the second decade of the twenty-first century, is that they still have something to say to us that remains relevant on questions such as, "What does the advance of science entail for our understanding of ourselves and our ideas of God?"
and "How is government to deal with religious diversity."
In her 2018 interview with Tyler Cowen, Agnes Callard described Descartes' thought experiment in the Meditations , where he encouraged a complete, systematic doubting of everything that you believe, to "see what you come to".
She said, "What Descartes comes to is a kind of real truth that he can build upon inside of his own mind."
She said that Hamlet 's monologues—"meditations on the nature of life and emotion"—were similar to Descartes' thought experiment.
Hamlet/Descartes were "apart from the world", as if they were "trapped" in their own heads.
Cowen asked Callard if Descartes actually found any truths through his thought experiment or was it just "an earlier version of the contemporary argument that we're living in a simulation, where the evil demon is the simulation rather than Bayesian reasoning ?"
Callard agreed that this argument can be traced to Descartes, who had said that he had refuted it.
She clarified that in Descartes' reasoning, you do "end up back in the mind of God"—in a "universe God has created" that is the "real world"...The whole question is about being connected to reality as opposed to being a figment.
If you're living in the world God created, God can create real things.
So you're living in a real world."
Purported Rosicrucianism   The membership of Descartes to the Rosicrucians is debated.
The initials of his name have been linked to the R.C.
acronym widely used by Rosicrucians.
Furthermore, in 1619 Descartes moved to Ulm which was a well renowned international center of the Rosicrucian movement.
During his journey in Germany, he met Johannes Faulhaber who had previously expressed his personal commitment to join the brotherhood.
Descartes dedicated the work titled The Mathematical Treasure Trove of Polybius, Citizen of the World to "learned men throughout the world
and especially to the distinguished B.R.C.
(Brothers of the Rosy Cross) in Germany".
The work was not completed and its publication is uncertain.
Bibliography   Writings   1618.
Musicae Compendium .
A treatise on music theory and the aesthetics of music, which Descartes dedicated to early collaborator Isaac Beeckman (written in 1618, first published—posthumously—in 1650).
: 127–129  1626–1628.
Regulae ad directionem ingenii ( Rules for the Direction of the Mind ).
Incomplete.
First published posthumously in Dutch translation in 1684 and in the original Latin at Amsterdam in 1701 ( R.
Des-Cartes Opuscula Posthuma Physica et Mathematica ).
The best critical edition, which includes the Dutch translation of 1684, is edited by Giovanni Crapulli (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966).
c.
1630.
De solidorum elementis .
Concerns the classification of Platonic solids and three-dimensional figurate numbers .
Said by some scholars to prefigure Euler's polyhedral formula .
Unpublished; discovered in Descartes' estate in Stockholm 1650, soaked for three days in the Seine in a shipwreck while being shipped back to Paris, copied in 1676 by Leibniz, and lost.
Leibniz's copy, also lost, was rediscovered circa 1860 in Hannover.
1630–1631.
La recherche de la vérité par la lumière naturelle ( The Search for Truth by Natural Light ) unfinished dialogue published in 1701.
 : 264ff  1630–1633.
Le Monde ( The World ) and L'Homme ( Man ).
Descartes' first systematic presentation of his natural philosophy.
Man was published posthumously in Latin translation in 1662; and The World posthumously in 1664.
1637.
Discours de la méthode ( Discourse on the Method ).
An introduction to the Essais , which include the Dioptrique , the Météores and the Géométrie .
La Géométrie ( Geometry ).
Descartes' major work in mathematics.
There is an English translation by Michael Mahoney (New York: Dover, 1979).
1641.
Meditationes de prima philosophia ( Meditations on First Philosophy ), also known as Metaphysical Meditations .
In Latin; a second edition, published the following year, included an additional objection and reply, and a Letter to Dinet .
A French translation by the Duke of Luynes , probably done without Descartes' supervision, was published in 1647.
Includes six Objections and Replies .
1644.
Principia philosophiae ( Principles of Philosophy ), a Latin textbook at first intended by Descartes to replace the Aristotelian textbooks then used in universities.
A French translation, Principes de philosophie by Claude Picot, under the supervision of Descartes, appeared in 1647 with a letter-preface to Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia.
1647.
Notae in programma ( Comments on a Certain Broadsheet ).
A reply to Descartes' one-time disciple Henricus Regius.
1648.
La description du corps humain ( The Description of the Human Body ).
Published posthumously by Clerselier in 1667.
Responsiones Renati Des Cartes...
( Conversation with Burman ).
Notes on a Q&A session between Descartes and Frans Burman on 16 April 1648.
Rediscovered in 1895 and published for the first time in 1896.
An annotated bilingual edition (Latin with French translation), edited by Jean-Marie Beyssade, was published in 1981 (Paris: PUF).
1649.
Les passions de l'âme ( Passions of the Soul ).
Dedicated to Princess Elisabeth of the Palatinate .
1657.
Correspondance (three volumes: 1657, 1659, 1667).
Published by Descartes' literary executor Claude Clerselier .
The third edition, in 1667, was the most complete; Clerselier omitted, however, much of the material pertaining to mathematics.
In January 2010, a previously unknown letter from Descartes, dated 27 May 1641, was found by the Dutch philosopher Erik-Jan Bos when browsing through Google .
Bos found the letter mentioned in a summary of autographs kept by Haverford College in Haverford, Pennsylvania .
The college was unaware that the letter had never been published.
This was the third letter by Descartes found in the last 25 years.
Handwritten letter by Descartes, December 1638     Principia philosophiae , 1644    Collected editions    Oeuvres de Descartes edited by Charles Adam and Paul Tannery , Paris: Léopold Cerf, 1897–1913, 13 volumes; new revised edition, Paris: Vrin-CNRS, 1964–1974, 11 volumes (the first 5 volumes contains the correspondence).
Étude du bon sens, La recherche de la vérité et autres écrits de jeunesse (1616–1631) edited by Vincent Carraud and Gilles Olivo, Paris: PUF, 2013.
Descartes, Œuvres complètes , new edition by Jean-Marie Beyssade and Denis Kambouchner, Paris: Gallimard, published volumes: I: Premiers écrits.
Règles pour la direction de l'esprit , 2016.
III: Discours de la Méthode et Essais , 2009.
VIII.1: Correspondance, 1 edited by Jean-Robert Armogathe, 2013.
VIII.2: Correspondance, 2 edited by Jean-Robert Armogathe, 2013.
Opere 1637–1649 , Milano, Bompiani, 2009, pp.
2531.
Edizione integrale (di prime edizioni) e traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di G.
Belgioioso con la collaborazione di I.
Agostini, M.
Marrone, M.
Savini ISBN  978-88-452-6332-3 .
Opere 1650–2009 , Milano, Bompiani, 2009, pp.
1723.
Edizione integrale delle opere postume e traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di G.
Belgioioso con la collaborazione di I.
Agostini, M.
Marrone, M.
Savini ISBN  978-88-452-6333-0 .
Tutte le lettere 1619–1650 , Milano, Bompiani, 2009 IIa ed., pp.
3104.
Nuova edizione integrale dell'epistolario cartesiano con traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di G.
Belgioioso con la collaborazione di I.
Agostini, M.
Marrone, F.A.
Meschini, M.
Savini e J.-R.
Armogathe ISBN  978-88-452-3422-4 .
René Descartes, Isaac Beeckman, Marin Mersenne.
Lettere 1619–1648 , Milano, Bompiani, 2015 pp.
1696.
Edizione integrale con traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di Giulia Beglioioso e Jean Robert-Armogathe ISBN  978-88-452-8071-9 .
Early editions of specific works    Discours de la methode  Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 1637  Renati Des-Cartes Principia philosophiæ  Archived 9 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 1644  Le monde de Mr. Descartes ou le traité de la lumiere  Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 1664  Geometria  Archived 24 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , 1659  Meditationes de prima philosophia  Archived 24 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , 1670  Opera philosophica  Archived 27 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , 1672   Collected English translations    1955.
The Philosophical Works , E.S.
Haldane and G.R.T.
Ross, trans.
This work is traditionally cited with the initials HR (for Haldane and Ross) followed by a volume number in Roman numerals; thus HR II refers to volume 2 of this edition.
1988.
The Philosophical Writings of Descartes in 3 vols.
Cottingham, J.
, Stoothoff, R., Kenny, A.
, and Murdoch, D., trans.
This work is traditionally cited with the initials CSM (for Cottingham, Stoothoff, and Murdoch) or CSMK (for Cottingham, Stoothoff, Murdoch, and Kenny) followed by a volume number in Roman numeral; thus CSM II refers to volume 2 of this edition.
René Descartes: The World and Other Writings.
Translated and edited by Stephen Gaukroger .
(This consists mainly of scientific writings, on physics, biology, astronomy, optics, etc., which were very influential in the 17th and 18th centuries, but which are routinely omitted or much abridged in modern collections of Descartes' philosophical works.)
Translation of single works    1628.
Regulae ad directionem ingenii.
Rules for the Direction of the Natural Intelligence.
A Bilingual Edition of the Cartesian Treatise on Method  Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine , ed.
& trans.
G.
Heffernan (Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1998).
1633.
The World, or Treatise on Light  Archived 21 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine , tr.
by Michael S.
Mahoney .
Treatise of Man , tr.
by T.
S.
Hall.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972.
Discourse on the Method, Optics, Geometry and Meteorology , trans.
P.
J.
Olscamp , Revised edition (Indianapolis: Hackett , 2001).
The Geometry of René Descartes  Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine , trans.
D.
E.
Smith & Marcia Latham (Chicago: Open Court , 1925).
Meditations on First Philosophy , tr.
by J.
Cottingham, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Latin original.
Alternative English title: Metaphysical Meditations .
A second edition published the following year, includes an additional Objection and Reply and a Letter to Dinet .
HTML Online Latin-French-English Edition  Archived 27 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine .
Principles of Philosophy  Archived 30 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine , trans.
V.
R.
Miller & R.
P.
Miller: ( Dordrecht /Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers , 1982).
Descartes' Conversation with Burman , tr.
by J.
Cottingham, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
Passions of the Soul  Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine , trans.
S.
H.
Voss (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1989).
Dedicated to Elisabeth of the Palatinate .
1619–1648.
Lettere 1619–1648 , ed.
by Giulia Beglioioso and Jean Robert-Armogathe, Milano, Bompiani, 2015 pp.
ISBN  978-88-452-8071-9  Philosophical statement made by René Descartes  "I think, therefore I am" redirects here.
For the R.
Dean Taylor album, see I Think, Therefore I Am .
For the Billie Eilish song referencing Descartes' principle, see Therefore I Am (song) .
René Descartes , who published the phrase in Discourse on the Method , in 1637.
Part of a series on René Descartes  Philosophy  Cartesianism  Rationalism  Foundationalism  Mechanism  Doubt and certainty  Dream argument  Cogito, ergo sum  Evil demon  Trademark argument  Causal adequacy principle  Mind–body dichotomy  Analytic geometry  Coordinate system  Cartesian circle  Folium  Rule of signs  Cartesian diver  Balloonist theory  Wax argument  Res cogitans  Res extensa   Works  Rules for the Direction of the Mind  The Search for Truth  The World  Discourse on the Method  La Géométrie  Meditations on First Philosophy  Principles of Philosophy  Passions of the Soul   People  Christina, Queen of Sweden  Nicolas Malebranche  Baruch Spinoza  Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz  Francine Descartes  v t e  The Latin  cogito, ergo sum , usually translated into English as " I think, therefore I am ",  is the " first principle " of René Descartes 's philosophy.
He originally published it in French as je pense , donc je suis in his 1637 Discourse on the Method , so as to reach a wider audience than Latin would have allowed.
It later appeared in Latin in his Principles of Philosophy , and a similar phrase also featured prominently in his Meditations on First Philosophy .
The dictum is also sometimes referred to as the cogito .
As Descartes explained in a margin note , "we cannot doubt of our existence while we doubt."
In the posthumously published The Search for Truth by Natural Light , he expressed this insight as dubito, ergo sum , vel, quod idem est, cogito, ergo sum ("I doubt, therefore I am — or what is the same — I think, therefore I am").
Antoine Léonard Thomas , in a 1765 essay in honor of Descartes presented it as dubito, ergo cogito, ergo sum ("I doubt, therefore I think , therefore I am").
Descartes's statement became a fundamental element of Western philosophy , as it purported to provide a certain  foundation for knowledge in the face of radical doubt .
While other knowledge could be a figment of imagination, deception, or mistake, Descartes asserted that the very act of doubting one's own existence served—at minimum—as proof of the reality of one's own mind; there must be a thinking entity —in this case the self —for there to be a thought.
One critique of the dictum, first suggested by Pierre Gassendi , is that it presupposes that there is an "I" which must be doing the thinking.
According to this line of criticism, the most that Descartes was entitled to say was that "thinking is occurring", not that "I am thinking".
In Descartes's writings   Descartes first wrote the phrase in French in his 1637 Discourse on the Method .
He referred to it in Latin without explicitly stating the familiar form of the phrase in his 1641 Meditations on First Philosophy .
The earliest written record of the phrase in Latin is in his 1644 Principles of Philosophy , where, in a margin note (see below), he provides a clear explanation of his intent: "e cannot doubt of our existence while we doubt".
Fuller forms of the phrase are attributable to other authors.
Discourse on the Method   The phrase first appeared (in French) in Descartes's 1637 Discourse on the Method in the first paragraph of its fourth part:     Ainsi, à cause que nos sens nous trompent quelquefois, je voulus supposer qu'il n'y avait aucune chose qui fût telle qu'ils nous la font imaginer; Et parce qu'il y a des hommes qui se méprennent en raisonnant, même touchant les plus simples matières de Géométrie, et y font des Paralogismes, jugeant que j'étais sujet à faillir autant qu'aucun autre, je rejetai comme fausses toutes les raisons que j'avais prises auparavant pour Démonstrations; Et enfin, considérant que toutes les mêmes pensées que nous avons étant éveillés nous peuvent aussi venir quand nous dormons, sans qu'il y en ait aucune raison pour lors qui soit vraie, je me résolus de feindre que toutes les choses qui m'étaient jamais entrées en l'esprit n'étaient non plus vraies que les illusions de mes songes.
Mais aussitôt après je pris garde que, pendant que je voulais ainsi penser que tout était faux, il fallait nécessairement que moi qui le pensais fusse quelque chose; Et remarquant que cette vérité, je pense,  donc je suis ,  était si ferme et si assurée, que toutes les plus extravagantes suppositions des Sceptiques n'étaient pas capables de l'ébranler, je jugeai que je pouvais la recevoir sans scrupule pour le premier principe de la Philosophie que je cherchais.
Accordingly, seeing that our senses sometimes deceive us, I was willing to suppose that there existed nothing really such as they presented to us; And because some men err in reasoning, and fall into Paralogisms, even on the simplest matters of Geometry, I, convinced that I was as open to error as any other, rejected as false all the reasonings I had hitherto taken for Demonstrations; And finally, when I considered that the very same thoughts (presentations) which we experience when awake may also be experienced when we are asleep, while there is at that time not one of them true, I supposed that all the objects (presentations) that had ever entered into my mind when awake, had in them no more truth than the illusions of my dreams.
But immediately upon this I observed that, whilst I thus wished to think that all was false, it was absolutely necessary that I, who thus thought, should be something; And as I observed that this truth, I think,  therefore I am ,  was so certain and of such evidence that no ground of doubt, however extravagant, could be alleged by the Sceptics capable of shaking it, I concluded that I might, without scruple, accept it as the first principle of the philosophy of which I was in search.
Meditations on First Philosophy   In 1641, Descartes published (in Latin) Meditations on first philosophy in which he referred to the proposition, though not explicitly as "cogito, ergo sum" in Meditation II:       hoc pronuntiatum: Ego sum, Ego existo ,  quoties a me profertur, vel mente concipitur, necessario esse verum.
this proposition: I am, I exist ,  whenever it is uttered by me, or conceived by the mind, necessarily is true.
Principles of Philosophy   In 1644, Descartes published (in Latin) his Principles of Philosophy where the phrase "ego cogito, ergo sum" appears in Part 1, article 7:     Sic autem rejicientes illa omnia, de quibus aliquo modo possumus dubitare, ac etiam, falsa esse fingentes, facilè quidem, supponimus nullum esse Deum, nullum coelum, nulla corpora; nosque etiam ipsos, non habere manus, nec pedes, nec denique ullum corpus, non autem ideò nos qui talia cogitamus nihil esse: repugnat enim ut putemus id quod cogitat eo ipso tempore quo cogitat non existere.
Ac proinde haec cognitio, ego cogito, ergo sum ,  est omnium prima & certissima, quae cuilibet ordine philosophanti occurrat.
While we thus reject all of which we can entertain the smallest doubt, and even imagine that it is false, we easily indeed suppose that there is neither God, nor sky, nor bodies, and that we ourselves even have neither hands nor feet, nor, finally, a body; but we cannot in the same way suppose that we are not while we doubt of the truth of these things; for there is a repugnance in conceiving that what thinks does not exist at the very time when it thinks.
Accordingly, the knowledge,   I think, therefore I am ,  is the first and most certain that occurs to one who philosophizes orderly.
Descartes's margin note for the above paragraph is:     Non posse à nobis dubitari, quin existamus dum dubitamus; atque hoc esse primum, quod ordine philosophando cognoscimus.
That we cannot doubt of our existence while we doubt, and that this is the first knowledge we acquire when we philosophize in order.
The Search for Truth by Natural Light   Descartes, in a lesser-known posthumously published work dated as written ca.
1647  and titled La Recherche de la Vérité par La Lumiere Naturale ( The Search for Truth by Natural Light ),   provides his only known phrasing of the cogito as cogito, ergo sum and admits that his insight is also expressible as dubito, ergo sum :       ...
entio, oportere, ut quid dubitatio, quid cogitatio, quid exsistentia sit antè sciamus, quàm de veritate hujus ratiocinii: dubito, ergo sum , vel, quod idem est, cogito, ergo sum  : plane simus persuasi.
…  it is necessary to know what doubt is, and what thought is, , before we can be fully persuaded of this reasoning — I doubt, therefore I am — or what is the same — I think, therefore I am .
Other forms   The proposition is sometimes given as dubito, ergo cogito, ergo sum .
This form was penned by the French literary critic, Antoine Léonard Thomas ,  in an award-winning 1765 essay in praise of Descartes, where it appeared as " Puisque je doute, je pense; puisque je pense, j'existe " ('Since I doubt, I think; since I think, I exist').
With rearrangement and compaction, the passage translates to "I doubt, therefore I think, therefore I am," or in Latin, " dubito, ergo cogito, ergo sum ."
This aptly captures Descartes's intent as expressed in his posthumously published La Recherche de la Vérité par La Lumiere Naturale as noted above: I doubt, therefore I am — or what is the same — I think, therefore I am .
A further expansion, dubito, ergo cogito, ergo sum—res cogitans ("…—a thinking thing") extends the cogito with Descartes's statement in the subsequent Meditation , "Ego sum res cogitans, id est dubitans, affirmans, negans, pauca intelligens, multa ignorans, volens, nolens, imaginans etiam et sentiens…" ("I am a thinking  thing, that is, a being who doubts, affirms, denies, knows a few objects, and is ignorant of many,-- who loves, hates,  wills, refuses, who imagines likewise, and perceives").
This has been referred to as "the expanded cogito ."
Translation   "I am thinking" vs.
"I think"   While the Latin cōgitō may be translated rather easily as "I think/ponder/visualize", je pense does not indicate whether the verb form corresponds to the English simple present or progressive aspect .
Technically speaking, the French lemma pense by itself is actually the result of numerous different conjugations of the verb penser (to think) – it could mean "I think...
(something)"/"He thinks...
(something)", "I think.
"/"He thinks.
", or even "You (must) think...
(something).
",  thereby necessitating the use of the wider context, or a pronoun, to understand the meaning.
In the case of je pense , a pronoun is already included, je or "I", but this still leaves the question of whether "I think..." or "I think."
is intended.
Therefore, translation needs a larger context to determine aspect .
Following John Lyons (1982),  Vladimir Žegarac notes, "The temptation to use the simple present is said to arise from the lack of progressive forms in Latin and French, and from a misinterpretation of the meaning of cogito as habitual or generic" (cf.
gnomic aspect ).
Also following Lyons, Ann Banfield writes, "In order for the statement on which Descartes's argument depends to represent certain knowledge,… its tense must be a true present—in English, a progressive,… not as 'I think' but as 'I am thinking, in conformity with the general translation of the Latin or French present tense in such nongeneric, nonstative contexts."
Or in the words of Simon Blackburn , "Descartes's premise is not 'I think' in the sense of 'I ski', which can be true even if you are not at the moment skiing.
It is supposed to be parallel to 'I am skiing'."
The similar translation "I am thinking, therefore I exist" of Descartes's correspondence in French (" je pense , donc je suis ") appears in The Philosophical Writings of Descartes by Cottingham et al.
: 247  The earliest known translation as "I am thinking, therefore I am" is from 1872 by Charles Porterfield Krauth .
Fumitaka Suzuki writes "Taking consideration of Cartesian theory of continuous creation, which theory was developed especially in the Meditations and in the Principles, we would assure that 'I am thinking, therefore I am/exist' is the most appropriate English translation of 'ego cogito, ergo sum'."
"I exist" vs.
"I am"   Alexis Deodato S.
Itao notes that cogito, ergo sum is "literally 'I think, therefore I am'."
Others differ: 1) " precise English translation will read as 'I am thinking, therefore I exist'.
;  and 2) "ince Descartes ...
emphasized that existence is such an important 'notion,' a better translation is 'I am thinking, therefore I exist.'"
Punctuation   Descartes wrote this phrase as such only once, in the posthumously published lesser-known work noted above, The Search for Truth by Natural Light .
It appeared there mid-sentence, uncapitalized, and with a comma.
(Commas were not used in Classical Latin  but were a regular feature of scholastic Latin,  the Latin Descartes "had learned in a Jesuit college at La Flèche."
) Most modern reference works show it with a comma, but it is often presented without a comma in academic work and in popular usage.
In Descartes's Principia Philosophiae , the proposition appears as ego cogito, ergo sum .
Interpretation   As put succinctly by Krauth (1872), "That cannot doubt which does not think, and that cannot think which does not exist.
I doubt, I think, I exist."
The phrase cogito, ergo sum is not used in Descartes's Meditations on First Philosophy but the term "the cogito " is used to refer to an argument from it.
In the Meditations , Descartes phrases the conclusion of the argument as "that the proposition, I am, I exist, is necessarily true whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind" ( Meditation II).
George Henry Lewes says Descartes "has told us that  was to find a starting point from which to reason—to find an irreversible certainty.
And where did he find this?
In his own consciousness.
Doubt as I may, I cannot doubt of my own existence, because my very doubts reveal to me a something which doubts.
You may call this an assumption, if you will; I point out the fact as one above and beyond all logic; which logic can neither prove nor disprove; but which must always remain an irreversible certainty, and as such a fitting basis of philosophy."
At the beginning of the second meditation, having reached what he considers to be the ultimate level of doubt—his argument from the existence of a deceiving god—Descartes examines his beliefs to see if any have survived the doubt.
In his belief in his own existence, he finds that it is impossible to doubt that he exists.
Even if there were a deceiving god (or an evil demon ), one's belief in their own existence would be secure, for there is no way one could be deceived unless one existed in order to be deceived.
But I have convinced myself that there is absolutely nothing in the world, no sky, no earth, no minds, no bodies.
Does it now follow that I, too, do not exist?
If I convinced myself of something , then I certainly existed.
But there is a deceiver of supreme power and cunning who deliberately and constantly deceives me.
In that case, I, too, undoubtedly exist, if he deceives me; and let him deceive me as much as he can, he will never bring it about that I am nothing, so long as I think that I am something.
So, after considering everything very thoroughly, I must finally conclude that the proposition, I am, I exist, is necessarily true whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind.
(AT VII 25; CSM II 16–17)    There are three important notes to keep in mind here.
First, he claims only the certainty of his own existence from the first-person point of view — he has not proved the existence of other minds at this point.
This is something that has to be thought through by each of us for ourselves, as we follow the course of the meditations.
Second, he does not say that his existence is necessary; he says that if he thinks , then necessarily he exists (see the instantiation principle ).
Third, this proposition "I am, I exist" is held true not based on a deduction (as mentioned above) or on empirical induction but on the clarity and self-evidence of the proposition.
Descartes does not use this first certainty, the cogito , as a foundation upon which to build further knowledge; rather, it is the firm ground upon which he can stand as he works to discover further truths.
As he puts it:  Archimedes used to demand just one firm and immovable point in order to shift the entire earth; so I too can hope for great things if I manage to find just one thing, however slight, that is certain and unshakable.
(AT VII 24; CSM II 16)   According to many Descartes specialists, including Étienne Gilson , the goal of Descartes in establishing this first truth is to demonstrate the capacity of his criterion — the immediate clarity and distinctiveness of self-evident propositions — to establish true and justified propositions despite having adopted a method of generalized doubt.
As a consequence of this demonstration, Descartes considers science and mathematics to be justified to the extent that their proposals are established on a similarly immediate clarity, distinctiveness, and self-evidence that presents itself to the mind.
The originality of Descartes's thinking, therefore, is not so much in expressing the cogito —a feat accomplished by other predecessors, as we shall see—but on using the cogito as demonstrating the most fundamental epistemological principle, that science and mathematics are justified by relying on clarity, distinctiveness, and self-evidence.
Baruch Spinoza in " Principia philosophiae cartesianae " at its Prolegomenon identified "cogito ergo sum" the " ego sum cogitans " (I am a thinking being) as the thinking substance with his ontological interpretation.
Predecessors   Although the idea expressed in cogito, ergo sum is widely attributed to Descartes, he was not the first to mention it.
Plato spoke about the "knowledge of knowledge" ( Greek : νόησις νοήσεως, nóesis noéseos ) and Aristotle explains the idea in full length:  But if life itself is good and pleasant…and if one who sees is conscious that he sees, one who hears that he hears, one who walks that he walks and similarly for all the other human activities there is a faculty that is conscious of their exercise, so that whenever we perceive, we are conscious that we perceive, and whenever we think, we are conscious that we think, and to be conscious that we are perceiving or thinking is to be conscious that we exist...
( Nicomachean Ethics , 1170a 25 ff.)
The Cartesian statement was interpreted to be an Aristotelian syllogism where the premise that all thinkers are also beings is not made explicit.
In the late sixth or early fifth century BC, Parmenides is quoted as saying "For to be aware and to be are the same".
(Fragment B3) In the early fifth century AD, Augustine of Hippo in De Civitate Dei (book XI, 26) affirmed his certain knowledge of his own existence, and added: "So far as these truths are concerned, I do not at all fear the arguments of the Academics when they say, What if you are mistaken?
For if I am mistaken, I exist."
This formulation ( si fallor, sum ) is sometimes called the Augustinian cogito .
In 1640, Descartes wrote to thank Andreas Colvius (a friend of Descartes's mentor, Isaac Beeckman ) for drawing his attention to Augustine:  I am obliged to you for drawing my attention to the passage of St Augustine relevant to my I am thinking, therefore I exist .
I went today to the library of this town to read it, and I do indeed find that he does use it to prove the certainty of our existence.
He goes on to show that there is a certain likeness of the Trinity in us, in that we exist, we know that we exist, and we love the existence and the knowledge we have.
I, on the other hand, use the argument to show that this I which is thinking is an immaterial substance with no bodily element.
These are two very different things.
In itself it is such a simple and natural thing to infer that one exists from the fact that one is doubting that it could have occurred to any writer.
But I am very glad to find myself in agreement with St Augustine, if only to hush the little minds who have tried to find fault with the principle.
: 159  Another predecessor was Avicenna 's " Floating Man " thought experiment on human self-awareness and self-consciousness .
The 8th century Hindu philosopher Adi Shankara wrote, in a similar fashion, that no one thinks 'I am not', arguing that one's existence cannot be doubted, as there must be someone there to doubt.
Spanish philosopher Gómez Pereira in his 1554 work De Inmortalitate Animae , wrote " nosco me aliquid noscere, & quidquid noscit, est, ergo ego sum " ('I know that I know something, anyone who knows is, therefore I am').
Critique   Use of "I"   In Descartes, The Project of Pure Enquiry , Bernard Williams provides a history and full evaluation of this issue.
The first to raise the "I" problem was Pierre Gassendi , who in his Disquisitio Metaphysica ,  as noted by Saul Fisher "points out that recognition that one has a set of thoughts does not imply that one is a particular thinker or another.
…he only claim that is indubitable here is the agent-independent claim that there is cognitive activity present."
The objection, as presented by Georg Lichtenberg , is that rather than supposing an entity that is thinking, Descartes should have said: "thinking is occurring."
That is, whatever the force of the cogito , Descartes draws too much from it; the existence of a thinking thing, the reference of the "I," is more than the cogito can justify.
Friedrich Nietzsche criticized the phrase in that it presupposes that there is an "I", that there is such an activity as "thinking", and that "I" know what "thinking" is.
He suggested a more appropriate phrase would be "it thinks" wherein the "it" could be an impersonal subject as in the sentence "It is raining."
Kierkegaard   The Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard calls the phrase a tautology in his Concluding Unscientific Postscript .
: 38–42 He argues that the cogito already presupposes the existence of "I", and therefore concluding with existence is logically trivial.
Kierkegaard's argument can be made clearer if one extracts the premise "I think" into the premises "'x' thinks" and "I am that 'x'", where "x" is used as a placeholder in order to disambiguate the "I" from the thinking thing.
Here, the cogito has already assumed the "I"'s existence as that which thinks.
For Kierkegaard, Descartes is merely "developing the content of a concept", namely that the "I", which already exists, thinks.
: 40 As Kierkegaard argues, the proper logical flow of argument is that existence is already assumed or presupposed in order for thinking to occur, not that existence is concluded from that thinking.
Williams   Bernard Williams claims that what we are dealing with when we talk of thought, or when we say "I am thinking," is something conceivable from a third-person perspective—namely objective "thought-events" in the former case, and an objective thinker in the latter.
He argues, first, that it is impossible to make sense of "there is thinking" without relativizing it to something.
However, this something cannot be Cartesian egos, because it is impossible to differentiate objectively between things just on the basis of the pure content of consciousness.
The obvious problem is that, through introspection , or our experience of consciousness , we have no way of moving to conclude the existence of any third-personal fact, to conceive of which would require something above and beyond just the purely subjective contents of the mind.
Heidegger  As a critic of Cartesian subjectivity , Heidegger sought to ground human subjectivity in death as that certainty which individualizes and authenticates our being.
As he wrote in 1925 in History of the Concept of Time :  This certainty, that "I myself am in that I will die," is the basic certainty of Dasein itself.
It is a genuine statement of Dasein, while cogito sum is only the semblance of such a statement.
If such pointed formulations mean anything at all, then the appropriate statement pertaining to Dasein in its being would have to be sum moribundus , moribundus not as someone gravely ill or wounded, but insofar as I am, I am moribundus .
The MORIBUNDUS first gives the SUM its sense.
John Macmurray   The Scottish philosopher John Macmurray rejects the cogito outright in order to place action at the center of a philosophical system he entitles the Form of the Personal.
"We must reject this, both as standpoint and as method.
If this be philosophy, then philosophy is a bubble floating in an atmosphere of unreality."
The reliance on thought creates an irreconcilable dualism between thought and action in which the unity of experience is lost, thus dissolving the integrity of our selves, and destroying any connection with reality.
In order to formulate a more adequate cogito , Macmurray proposes the substitution of "I do" for "I think,"  ultimately leading to a belief in God as an agent to whom all persons stand in relation.
In popular culture   In the short story , by Harlan Ellison , I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream , AM, the allied mastercomputer remarks, when asked what 'AM' means, says "At first it meant Allied Mastercomputer, and then it meant Adaptive Manipulator, and later on it developed sentience and linked itself up and they called it an Aggressive Menace, but by then it was too late, and finally called itself AM, emerging intelligence, and what it meant was I am ...
cogito ergo sum ...
I think, therefore I am."
In the Japanese animated television series, Ergo Proxy , a computer virus that effects the autoreivs, the series' version of robots , known as the Cogito virus begins infecting the autoreiv's, which is named such due to the fact that it makes the infected conscious , and experience emotions as a human would.
In Monty Python 's Bruces' Philosophers Song , one of the lyrics jokingly quotes Descarte's axiom as "I drink therefore I am."
In season one, episode two, of The Office , David Brent says, "We are the most efficient branch, cogito ergo sum, we'll be fine."
It is also a common theme in The Matrix , and Bladerunner .
Cancel  Editing help (opens in new window)       Copy and paste: – — ° ′ ″ ≈ ≠ ≤ ≥ ± − × ÷ ← → · § Cite your sources: <ref></ref>   {{}}   {{{}}}   |      ]   ]   #REDIRECT ]   &nbsp;   <s></s>   <sup></sup>   <sub></sub>   <code></code>   <pre></pre>   <blockquote></blockquote>   <ref></ref> <ref name="" />   {{Reflist}}   <references />   <includeonly></includeonly>   <noinclude></noinclude>   {{DEFAULTSORT:}}   <nowiki></nowiki>   <!-- -->   <span class="plainlinks"></span>     Symbols: ~ | ¡ ¿ † ‡ ↔ ↑ ↓ • ¶   # ∞   ‹› «»   ¤ ₳ ฿ ₵ ¢ ₡ ₢ $ ₫ ₯ € ₠ ₣ ƒ ₴ ₭ ₤ ℳ ₥ ₦ № ₧ ₰ £ ៛ ₨ ₪ ৳ ₮ ₩ ¥   ♠ ♣ ♥ ♦   𝄫 ♭ ♮ ♯ 𝄪   © ® ™  Latin: A a Á á À à Â â Ä ä Ǎ ǎ Ă ă Ā ā Ã ã Å å Ą ą Æ æ Ǣ ǣ   B b   C c Ć ć Ċ ċ Ĉ ĉ Č č Ç ç   D d Ď ď Đ đ Ḍ ḍ Ð ð   E e É é È è Ė ė Ê ê Ë ë Ě ě Ĕ ĕ Ē ē Ẽ ẽ Ę ę Ẹ ẹ Ɛ ɛ Ǝ ǝ Ə ə   F f   G g Ġ ġ Ĝ ĝ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ   H h Ĥ ĥ Ħ ħ Ḥ ḥ   I i İ ı Í í Ì ì Î î Ï ï Ǐ ǐ Ĭ ĭ Ī ī Ĩ ĩ Į į Ị ị   J j Ĵ ĵ   K k Ķ ķ   L l Ĺ ĺ Ŀ ŀ Ľ ľ Ļ ļ Ł ł Ḷ ḷ Ḹ ḹ   M m Ṃ ṃ   N n Ń ń Ň ň Ñ ñ Ņ ņ Ṇ ṇ Ŋ ŋ   O o Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ö ö Ǒ ǒ Ŏ ŏ Ō ō Õ õ Ǫ ǫ Ọ ọ Ő ő Ø ø Œ œ   Ɔ ɔ   P p   Q q   R r Ŕ ŕ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ   S s Ś ś Ŝ ŝ Š š Ş ş Ș ș Ṣ ṣ ß   T t Ť ť Ţ ţ Ț ț Ṭ ṭ Þ þ   U u Ú ú Ù ù Û û Ü ü Ǔ ǔ Ŭ ŭ Ū ū Ũ ũ Ů ů Ų ų Ụ ụ Ű ű Ǘ ǘ Ǜ ǜ Ǚ ǚ Ǖ ǖ   V v   W w Ŵ ŵ   X x   Y y Ý ý Ŷ ŷ Ÿ ÿ Ỹ ỹ Ȳ ȳ   Z z Ź ź Ż ż Ž ž   ß Ð ð Þ þ Ŋ ŋ Ə ə  Greek: Ά ά Έ έ Ή ή Ί ί Ό ό Ύ ύ Ώ ώ   Α α Β β Γ γ Δ δ   Ε ε Ζ ζ Η η Θ θ   Ι ι Κ κ Λ λ Μ μ   Ν ν Ξ ξ Ο ο Π π   Ρ ρ Σ σ ς Τ τ Υ υ   Φ φ Χ χ Ψ ψ Ω ω   {{Polytonic|}}  Cyrillic: А а Б б В в Г г   Ґ ґ Ѓ ѓ Д д Ђ ђ   Е е Ё ё Є є Ж ж   З з Ѕ ѕ И и І і   Ї ї Й й Ј ј К к   Ќ ќ Л л Љ љ М м   Н н Њ њ О о П п   Р р С с Т т Ћ ћ   У у Ў ў Ф ф Х х   Ц ц Ч ч Џ џ Ш ш   Щ щ Ъ ъ Ы ы Ь ь   Э э Ю ю Я я   ́  IPA: t̪ d̪ ʈ ɖ ɟ ɡ ɢ ʡ ʔ   ɸ β θ ð ʃ ʒ ɕ ʑ ʂ ʐ ç ʝ ɣ χ ʁ ħ ʕ ʜ ʢ ɦ   ɱ ɳ ɲ ŋ ɴ   ʋ ɹ ɻ ɰ   ʙ ⱱ ʀ ɾ ɽ   ɫ ɬ ɮ ɺ ɭ ʎ ʟ   ɥ ʍ ɧ   ʼ   ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ ʛ   ʘ ǀ ǃ ǂ ǁ   ɨ ʉ ɯ   ɪ ʏ ʊ   ø ɘ ɵ ɤ   ə ɚ   ɛ œ ɜ ɝ ɞ ʌ ɔ   æ   ɐ ɶ ɑ ɒ   ʰ ʱ ʷ ʲ ˠ ˤ ⁿ ˡ   ˈ ˌ ː ˑ ̪   {{IPA|}}    This page is a member of 8 hidden categories ( help ) :  Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements  Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011  Category:Articles with NKC identifiers  Category:Articles with short description  Category:Commons category link from Wikidata  Category:Short description is different from Wikidata  Category:Use mdy dates from December 2022  Category:Webarchive template wayback links     Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_proof "Abbreviation to indicate the completion of a mathematical or logical proof  For other uses, see QED .
or QED is an initialism of the Latin phrase  quod erat demonstrandum , meaning "that which was to be demonstrated".
Literally it states "what was to be shown".
Traditionally, the abbreviation is placed at the end of mathematical proofs and philosophical  arguments in print publications, to indicate that the proof or the argument is complete.
Etymology and early use   The phrase quod erat demonstrandum is a translation into Latin from the Greek  ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι ( hoper edei deixai ; abbreviated as ΟΕΔ ).
Translating from the Latin phrase into English yields "that was to be demonstrated".
However, translating the Greek phrase ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι can produce a slightly different meaning.
In particular, since the verb "δείκνυμι" also means to show or to prove ,  a different translation from the Greek phrase would read "The very thing it was required to have shown."
The Greek phrase was used by many early Greek mathematicians, including Euclid  and Archimedes .
The Latin phrase is attested in a 1501 Euclid translation of Giorgio Valla .
Its abbreviation q.e.d.
is used once in 1598 by Johannes Praetorius ,  more in 1643 by Anton Deusing ,  extensively in 1655 by Isaac Barrow in the form Q.E.D.
,  and subsequently by many post- Renaissance mathematicians and philosophers.
Modern philosophy   Philippe van Lansberge's 1604 Triangulorum Geometriæ used quod erat demonstrandum to conclude some proofs; others ended with phrases such as sigillatim deinceps demonstrabitur , magnitudo demonstranda est , and other variants.
During the European Renaissance, scholars often wrote in Latin, and phrases such as Q.E.D.
were often used to conclude proofs.
Spinoza 's original text of Ethics , Part 1, Q.E.D.
is used at the end of Demonstratio of Propositio III on the right hand page  Perhaps the most famous use of Q.E.D.
in a philosophical argument is found in the Ethics of Baruch Spinoza , published posthumously in 1677.
Written in Latin, it is considered by many to be Spinoza's magnum opus .
The style and system of the book are, as Spinoza says, "demonstrated in geometrical order", with axioms and definitions followed by propositions .
For Spinoza, this is a considerable improvement over René Descartes 's writing style in the Meditations , which follows the form of a diary .
Difference from Q.E.F.
There is another Latin phrase with a slightly different meaning, usually shortened similarly, but being less common in use.
Quod erat faciendum , originating from the Greek geometers' closing ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι ( hoper edei poiēsai ), meaning "which had to be done".
Because of the difference in meaning, the two phrases should not be confused.
Euclid used the Greek original of Quod Erat Faciendum (Q.E.F.)
to close propositions that were not proofs of theorems, but constructions of geometric objects.
For example, Euclid's first proposition showing how to construct an equilateral triangle , given one side, is concluded this way.
English equivalent   There is no common formal English equivalent, although the end of a proof may be announced with a simple statement such as “thus it is proved,” "this completes the proof", "as required", "as desired", "as expected", "hence proved", "ergo", "so correct", or other similar locutions.
Typographical forms used symbolically   Main article: Tombstone (typography)  Due to the paramount importance of proofs in mathematics , mathematicians since the time of Euclid have developed conventions to demarcate the beginning and end of proofs.
In printed English language texts, the formal statements of theorems , lemmas , and propositions are set in italics by tradition.
The beginning of a proof usually follows immediately thereafter, and is indicated by the word "proof" in boldface or italics.
On the other hand, several symbolic conventions exist to indicate the end of a proof.
While some authors still use the classical abbreviation, Q.E.D., it is relatively uncommon in modern mathematical texts.
Paul Halmos claims to have pioneered the use of a solid black square (or rectangle) at the end of a proof as a Q.E.D.
symbol,  a practice which has become standard, although not universal.
Halmos noted that he adopted this use of a symbol from magazine typography customs in which simple geometric shapes had been used to indicate the end of an article, so-called end marks .
This symbol was later called the tombstone , the Halmos symbol , or even a halmos by mathematicians.
Often the Halmos symbol is drawn on chalkboard to signal the end of a proof during a lecture, although this practice is not so common as its use in printed text.
The tombstone symbol appears in TeX as the character     ◼    {\displaystyle \blacksquare }   (filled square, \blacksquare) and sometimes, as a     ◻    {\displaystyle \square }   (hollow square, \square or \Box).
In the AMS Theorem Environment for LaTeX , the hollow square is the default end-of-proof symbol.
Unicode explicitly provides the "end of proof" character, U+220E (∎).
Some authors use other Unicode symbols to note the end of a proof, including, ▮ (U+25AE, a black vertical rectangle), and ‣ (U+2023, a triangular bullet).
Other authors have adopted two forward slashes (//,      /    /     {\displaystyle //}   ) or four forward slashes (////,      /    /    /    /     {\displaystyle ////}   ).
In other cases, authors have elected to segregate proofs typographically—by displaying them as indented blocks.
Modern humorous use   In Joseph Heller 's 1961 book Catch-22 , the Chaplain , having been told to examine a forged letter allegedly signed by him (which he knew he didn't sign), verified that his name was in fact there.
His investigator replied, "Then you wrote it.
Q.E.D."
The chaplain said he did not write it and that it was not his handwriting, to which the investigator replied, "Then you signed your name in somebody else's handwriting again."
In the 1978 science-fiction radio comedy, and later in the television, novel, and film adaptations of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy , "Q.E.D."
is referred to in the Guide's entry for the babel fish, when it is claimed that the babel fish – which serves the "mind-bogglingly" useful purpose of being able to translate any spoken language when inserted into a person's ear – is used as evidence for existence and non-existence of God.
The exchange from the novel is as follows: "'I refuse to prove I exist,' says God, 'for proof denies faith, and without faith I am nothing.'
'But,' says Man, 'The babel fish is a dead giveaway, isn't it?
It could not have evolved by chance.
It proves you exist, and so therefore, by your own arguments, you don't.
QED.'
'Oh dear,' says God, 'I hadn't thought of that,' and promptly vanishes in a puff of logic."
In Neal Stephenson 's 1999 novel Cryptonomicon , Q.E.D.
is used as a punchline to several humorous anecdotes, in which characters go to great lengths to prove something non-mathematical.
Singer-songwriter Thomas Dolby 's 1988 song "Airhead" includes the lyric, "Quod erat demonstrandum, baby," referring to the self-evident vacuousness of the eponymous subject; and in response, a female voice delightedly squeals, "Oooh...
you speak French!"
Indo-European language of the Italic branch  For other uses, see Latin (disambiguation) .
Not to be confused with Ladin .
Latin Latin inscription on a stone inside the Colosseum in Rome , Italy Native to Latium Ancient Rome Ethnicity Latins Romans Era As a native language, from the 7th century BC  to c.
AD 700 Language family Indo-European   Italic Latino-Faliscan Latin Early form Old Latin  Writing system Latin alphabet ( Latin script ) Official status Official language in  Vatican City Regulated by Pontifical Academy for Latin Language codes ISO 639-1 la ISO 639-2 lat ISO 639-3 lat Glottolog impe1234 lati1261 Linguasphere 51-AAB-aa, -ab, -ac Greatest extent of the Roman Empire under Emperor Trajan ( c.
117 AD ) and the area governed by Latin speakers.
Many languages other than Latin were spoken within the empire.
This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.
Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters.
For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .
Latin ( lingua Latina , Latin:   , or Latinum , Latin:   ) is a classical language belonging to the Italic branch of the Indo-European languages .
Considered a dead language , Latin was originally spoken in Latium (now known as Lazio ), the lower Tiber area around Rome .
Through the expansion of the Roman Republic it became the dominant language in the Italian Peninsula and subsequently throughout the Roman Empire .
Even after the fall of Western Rome , Latin remained the common language of international communication , science, scholarship and academia in Europe until well into the 18th century, when regional vernaculars (including its own descendants, the Romance languages ) supplanted it in common academic and political usage.
For most of the time it was used, it would be considered a dead language in the modern linguistic definition; that is, it lacked native speakers, despite being used extensively and actively.
Latin is a highly inflected language , with three distinct genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), seven noun cases (nominative, accusative, genitive, dative, ablative, vocative, and vestigial locative), five declensions , four verb conjugations , six tenses (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect), three persons , three moods , two voices (passive and active), two or three aspects , and two numbers (singular and plural).
The Latin alphabet is directly derived from the Etruscan and Greek alphabets .
By the late Roman Republic (75 BC), Old Latin had evolved into standardized Classical Latin .
Vulgar Latin was the colloquial register with less prestigious variations attested in inscriptions and some literary works such as those of the comic playwrights Plautus and Terence  and author Petronius .
Late Latin is the literary language from the 3rd century AD onwards, and Vulgar Latin's various regional dialects had developed by the 6th to 9th centuries into the ancestors of the modern Romance languages .
In Latin's usage beyond the early medieval period, it lacked native speakers.
Medieval Latin was used across Western and Catholic Europe during the Middle Ages as a working and literary language from the 9th century to the Renaissance , which then developed a classicizing form, called Renaissance Latin .
This was the basis for Neo-Latin which evolved during the early modern period .
In these periods Latin was used productively and generally taught to be written and spoken, at least until the late seventeenth century, when spoken skills began to erode.
It then became increasingly taught only to be read.
Latin remains the official language of the Holy See and the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church at the Vatican City .
The church continues to adapt concepts from modern languages, contributing to the continued development of the Latin language.
Latin today , however, is more often studied to be read rather than spoken or actively used.
Latin has greatly influenced the English language, Along with a large amount of others, and historically contributed many words to the English lexicon , particularly after the Christianization of the Anglo-Saxons and the Norman Conquest .
Latin (and Ancient Greek ) roots are especially used in English descriptions of theology , science disciplines (especially anatomy and taxonomy ), medicine , and law .
History   Main article: History of Latin  The linguistic landscape of Central Italy at the beginning of Roman expansion  A number of phases of the language have been recognized, each distinguished by subtle differences in vocabulary, usage, spelling, and syntax.
There are no hard and fast rules of classification; different scholars emphasize different features.
As a result, the list has variants, as well as alternative names.
In addition to the historical phases, Ecclesiastical Latin refers to the styles used by the writers of the Roman Catholic Church from late antiquity onward, as well as by Protestant scholars.
After the Western Roman Empire fell in 476 and Germanic kingdoms took its place, the Germanic people adopted Latin as a language more suitable for legal and other, more formal uses.
Old Latin   Main article: Old Latin  The Lapis Niger , probably the oldest extant Latin inscription, from Rome, c.
600 BC during the semi-legendary Roman Kingdom  The earliest known form of Latin is Old Latin, also called Archaic or Early Latin, which was spoken from the Roman Kingdom , traditionally founded in 753 BC, through the later part of the Roman Republic , up to 75 BC, i.e.
before the age of Classical Latin .
It is attested both in inscriptions and in some of the earliest extant Latin literary works, such as the comedies of Plautus and Terence .
The Latin alphabet was devised from the Etruscan alphabet .
The writing later changed from what was initially either a right-to-left or a boustrophedon   script to what ultimately became a strictly left-to-right script.
Classical Latin   Main article: Classical Latin  During the late republic and into the first years of the empire, from about 75 BC to 200 AD, a new Classical Latin arose, a conscious creation of the orators, poets, historians and other literate men, who wrote the great works of classical literature , which were taught in grammar and rhetoric schools.
Today's instructional grammars trace their roots to such schools , which served as a sort of informal language academy dedicated to maintaining and perpetuating educated speech.
Vulgar Latin   Main article: Vulgar Latin  Philological analysis of Archaic Latin works, such as those of Plautus , which contain fragments of everyday speech, gives evidence of an informal register of the language, Vulgar Latin (termed sermo vulgi , "the speech of the masses", by Cicero ).
Some linguists, particularly in the nineteenth century, believed this to be a separate language, existing more or less in parallel with the literary or educated Latin, but this is now widely dismissed.
The term 'Vulgar Latin' remains difficult to define, referring both to informal speech at any time within the history of Latin, and the kind of informal Latin that had begun to move away from the written language significantly in the post-Imperial period, that led ultimately to the Romance languages .
During the Classical period, informal language was rarely written, so philologists have been left with only individual words and phrases cited by classical authors, inscriptions such as Curse tablets and those found as graffiti .
In the Late Latin period, language changes reflecting spoken (non-classical) norms tend to be found in greater quantities in texts.
As it was free to develop on its own, there is no reason to suppose that the speech was uniform either diachronically or geographically.
On the contrary, Romanised European populations developed their own dialects of the language, which eventually led to the differentiation of Romance languages .
Late Latin   Main article: Late Latin  Late Latin is a kind of written Latin used in the 3rd to 6th centuries.
This began to diverge from Classical forms at a faster pace.
It is characterised by greater use of prepositions, and word order that is closer to modern Romance languages, for example, while grammatically retaining more or less the same formal rules as Classical Latin.
Ultimately, Latin diverged into a distinct written form, where the commonly spoken form was perceived as a separate language, for instance early French or Italian dialects, that could be transcribed differently.
It took some time for these to be viewed as wholly different from Latin however.
Romance languages   Main article: Romance languages  See also: Lexical changes from Classical Latin to Proto-Romance  While the written form of Latin was increasingly standardized into a fixed form, the spoken forms began to diverge more greatly.
Currently, the five most widely spoken Romance languages by number of native speakers are Spanish , Portuguese , French , Italian , and Romanian .
Despite dialectal variation, which is found in any widespread language, the languages of Spain, France, Portugal, and Italy have retained a remarkable unity in phonological forms and developments, bolstered by the stabilising influence of their common Christian (Roman Catholic) culture.
It was not until the Muslim conquest of Spain in 711, cutting off communications between the major Romance regions, that the languages began to diverge seriously.
The spoken Latin that would later become Romanian diverged somewhat more from the other varieties, as it was largely separated from the unifying influences in the western part of the Empire.
Spoken Latin began to diverge into distinct languages by the 9th century at the latest, when the earliest extant Romance writings begin to appear.
They were, throughout the period, confined to everyday speech, as Medieval Latin was used for writing.
It should also be noted, however, that for many Italians using Latin, there was no complete separation between Italian and Latin, even into the beginning of the Renaissance .
Petrarch for example saw Latin as a literary version of the spoken language.
Medieval Latin   Main article: Medieval Latin  The Latin Malmesbury Bible from 1407  Medieval Latin is the written Latin in use during that portion of the postclassical period when no corresponding Latin vernacular existed, that is from around 700 to 1500 AD.
The spoken language had developed into the various Romance languages; however, in the educated and official world, Latin continued without its natural spoken base.
Moreover, this Latin spread into lands that had never spoken Latin, such as the Germanic and Slavic nations.
It became useful for international communication between the member states of the Holy Roman Empire and its allies.
Without the institutions of the Roman Empire that had supported its uniformity, Medieval Latin was much freer in its linguistic cohesion: for example, in classical Latin sum and eram are used as auxiliary verbs in the perfect and pluperfect passive, which are compound tenses.
Medieval Latin might use fui and fueram instead.
Furthermore, the meanings of many words were changed and new words were introduced, often under influence from the vernacular.
Identifiable individual styles of classically incorrect Latin prevail.
Renaissance and Neo-Latin   Main articles: Renaissance Latin and Neo-Latin  Most 15th-century printed books ( incunabula ) were in Latin, with the vernacular languages playing only a secondary role.
Renaissance Latin, 1300 to 1500, and the classicised Latin that followed through to the present are often grouped together as Neo-Latin , or New Latin, which have in recent decades become a focus of renewed study , given their importance for the development of European culture, religion and science.
The vast majority of written Latin belongs to this period, but its full extent is unknown.
The Renaissance reinforced the position of Latin as a spoken and written language by the scholarship by the Renaissance humanists .
Petrarch and others began to change their usage of Latin as they explored the texts of the Classical Latin world.
Skills of textual criticism evolved to create much more accurate versions of extant texts through the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and some important texts were rediscovered.
Comprehensive versions of author's works were published by Isaac Casaubon , Joseph Scaliger and others.
Nevertheless, despite the careful work of Petrarch, Politian and others, first the demand for manuscripts, and then the rush to bring works into print, led to the circulation of inaccurate copies for several centuries following.
Neo-Latin literature was extensive and prolific, but less well known or understood today.
Works covered poetry, prose stories and early novels, occasional pieces and collections of letters, to name a few.
Famous and well regarded writers included Petrarch, Erasmus, Salutati , Celtis , George Buchanan and Thomas More .
Non fiction works were long produced in many subjects, including the sciences, law, philosophy, historiography and theology.
Famous examples include Isaac Newton 's Principia .
Latin was also used as a convenient medium for translations of important works first written in a vernacular, such as those of Descartes .
Latin education underwent a process of reform to classicise written and spoken Latin.
Schooling remained largely Latin medium until approximately 1700.
Until the end of the 17th century, the majority of books and almost all diplomatic documents were written in Latin.
Afterwards, most diplomatic documents were written in French (a Romance language ) and later native or other languages.
Education methods gradually shifted towards written Latin, and eventually concentrating solely on reading skills.
The decline of Latin education took several centuries and proceeded much more slowly than the decline in written Latin output.
Contemporary Latin   Main articles: Contemporary Latin and Ecclesiastical Latin  Despite having no native speakers, Latin is still used for a variety of purposes in the contemporary world.
Religious use   The signs at Wallsend Metro station are in English and Latin, as a tribute to Wallsend 's role as one of the outposts of the Roman Empire , as the eastern end of Hadrian's Wall (hence the name) at Segedunum .
The largest organisation that retains Latin in official and quasi-official contexts is the Catholic Church .
The Catholic Church required that Mass be carried out in Latin until the Second Vatican Council of 1962–1965, which permitted the use of the vernacular .
Latin remains the language of the Roman Rite .
The Tridentine Mass (also known as the Extraordinary Form or Traditional Latin Mass) is celebrated in Latin.
Although the Mass of Paul VI (also known as the Ordinary Form or the Novus Ordo) is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language, it can be and often is said in Latin, in part or in whole, especially at multilingual gatherings.
It is the official language of the Holy See , the primary language of its public journal , the Acta Apostolicae Sedis , and the working language of the Roman Rota .
Vatican City is also home to the world's only automatic teller machine that gives instructions in Latin.
In the pontifical universities postgraduate courses of Canon law are taught in Latin, and papers are written in the same language.
There are a small number of Latin services held in the Anglican church.
These include an annual service in Oxford, delivered with a Latin sermon; a relic from the period when Latin was the normal spoken language of the university.
The polyglot European Union has adopted Latin names in the logos of some of its institutions for the sake of linguistic compromise, an "ecumenical nationalism" common to most of the continent and as a sign of the continent's heritage (such as the EU Council : Consilium ).
Use of Latin for mottos   In the Western world, many organizations, governments and schools use Latin for their mottos due to its association with formality, tradition, and the roots of Western culture .
Canada's motto A mari usque ad mare ("from sea to sea") and most provincial mottos are also in Latin.
The Canadian Victoria Cross is modelled after the British Victoria Cross which has the inscription "For Valour".
Because Canada is officially bilingual, the Canadian medal has replaced the English inscription with the Latin Pro Valore .
Spain's motto Plus ultra , meaning "even further", or figuratively "Further!
", is also Latin in origin.
It is taken from the personal motto of Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain (as Charles I), and is a reversal of the original phrase Non terrae plus ultra ("No land further beyond", "No further!").
According to legend , this phrase was inscribed as a warning on the Pillars of Hercules , the rocks on both sides of the Strait of Gibraltar and the western end of the known, Mediterranean world.
Charles adopted the motto following the discovery of the New World by Columbus, and it also has metaphorical suggestions of taking risks and striving for excellence.
In the United States the unofficial national motto until 1956 was E pluribus unum meaning "Out of many, one".
The motto continues to be featured on the Great Seal , it also appears on the flags and seals of both houses of congress and the flags of the states of Michigan, North Dakota, New York, and Wisconsin.
The motto's 13 letters symbolically represent the original Thirteen Colonies which revolted from the British Crown.
The motto is featured on all presently minted coinage and has been featured in most coinage throughout the nation's history.
Several states of the United States have Latin mottos , such as:  Arizona 's Ditat deus ("God enriches");  Connecticut 's Qui transtulit sustinet ("He who transplanted sustains");  Kansas 's Ad astra per aspera ("Through hardships, to the stars");  Colorado 's Nil sine numine ("Nothing without providence");  Michigan 's Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam, circumspice ("If you seek a pleasant peninsula, look about you"), is based on that of Sir Christopher Wren , in St. Paul's Cathedral ;  Missouri 's Salus populi suprema lex esto ("The health of the people should be the highest law");  New York (state) 's Excelsior ("Ever upward");  North Carolina 's Esse Quam Videri ("To be rather than to seem");  South Carolina 's Dum spiro spero ("While  breathing, I hope");  Virginia 's Sic semper tyrannis ("Thus always to tyrants "); and  West Virginia 's Montani Semper Liberi ("Mountaineers  always free").
Many military organizations today have Latin mottos, such as:  Semper Paratus ("always ready"), the motto of the United States Coast Guard ;  Semper Fidelis ("always faithful"), the motto of the United States Marine Corps ;  Semper Supra ("always above"), the motto of the United States Space Force ;  Per ardua ad astra ("Through adversity/struggle to the stars"), the motto of the Royal Air Force (RAF); and  Vigilamus pro te ("We stand on guard for thee"), the motto of the Canadian Armed Forces .
A law governing body in the Philippines have a Latin motto, such as:  Justitiae Pax Opus ("Justice, peace, work"), the motto of the Department of Justice (Philippines) ;  Some colleges and universities have adopted Latin mottos, for example Harvard University 's motto is Veritas ("truth").
Veritas was the goddess of truth, a daughter of Saturn, and the mother of Virtue.
Other modern uses   Switzerland has adopted the country's Latin short name Helvetia on coins and stamps, since there is no room to use all of the nation's four official languages .
For a similar reason, it adopted the international vehicle and internet code CH , which stands for Confoederatio Helvetica , the country's full Latin name.
Some film and television in ancient settings, such as Sebastiane , The Passion of the Christ and Barbarians (2020 TV series) , have been made with dialogue in Latin.
Occasionally, Latin dialogue is used because of its association with religion or philosophy, in such film/television series as The Exorcist and Lost (" Jughead ").
Subtitles are usually shown for the benefit of those who do not understand Latin.
There are also songs written with Latin lyrics .
The libretto for the opera-oratorio Oedipus rex by Igor Stravinsky is in Latin.
The continued instruction of Latin is often seen as a highly valuable component of a liberal arts education.
Latin is taught at many high schools, especially in Europe and the Americas.
It is most common in British public schools and grammar schools, the Italian liceo classico and liceo scientifico , the German Humanistisches Gymnasium and the Dutch gymnasium .
QDP Ep 84 – De Ludo "Mysterium": A Latin-language podcast from the US Occasionally, some media outlets, targeting enthusiasts, broadcast in Latin.
Notable examples include Radio Bremen in Germany, YLE radio in Finland (the Nuntii Latini broadcast from 1989 until it was shut down in June 2019),  and Vatican Radio & Television, all of which broadcast news segments and other material in Latin.
A variety of organisations, as well as informal Latin 'circuli' ('circles'), have been founded in more recent times to support the use of spoken Latin.
Moreover, a number of university classics departments have begun incorporating communicative pedagogies in their Latin courses.
These include the University of Kentucky, the University of Oxford and also Princeton University.
There are many websites and forums maintained in Latin by enthusiasts.
The Latin Wikipedia has more than 130,000 articles.
Urdaneta City 's motto Deo servire populo sufficere ("It is enough for the people to serve God") the Latin motto can be read in the old seal of this Philippine city.
Legacy   Italian, French, Portuguese , Spanish, Romanian , Catalan , Romansh and other Romance languages are direct descendants of Latin.
There are also many Latin borrowings in English and Albanian ,  as well as a few in German, Dutch , Norwegian , Danish and Swedish .
Latin is still spoken in Vatican City, a city-state situated in Rome that is the seat of the Catholic Church .
Literature   Julius Caesar 's Commentarii de Bello Gallico is one of the most famous classical Latin texts of the Golden Age of Latin.
The unvarnished, journalistic style of this patrician general has long been taught as a model of the urbane Latin officially spoken and written in the floruit of the Roman Republic .
The works of several hundred ancient authors who wrote in Latin have survived in whole or in part, in substantial works or in fragments to be analyzed in philology .
They are in part the subject matter of the field of classics .
Their works were published in manuscript form before the invention of printing and are now published in carefully annotated printed editions, such as the Loeb Classical Library , published by Harvard University Press , or the Oxford Classical Texts , published by Oxford University Press .
Latin translations of modern literature such as: The Hobbit , Treasure Island , Robinson Crusoe , Paddington Bear , Winnie the Pooh , The Adventures of Tintin , Asterix , Harry Potter , Le Petit Prince , Max and Moritz , How the Grinch Stole Christmas!
, The Cat in the Hat , and a book of fairy tales, " fabulae mirabiles ", are intended to garner popular interest in the language.
Additional resources include phrasebooks and resources for rendering everyday phrases and concepts into Latin, such as Meissner's Latin Phrasebook .
Inscriptions   Some inscriptions have been published in an internationally agreed, monumental, multivolume series, the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum (CIL).
Authors and publishers vary, but the format is about the same: volumes detailing inscriptions with a critical apparatus stating the provenance and relevant information.
The reading and interpretation of these inscriptions is the subject matter of the field of epigraphy .
About 270,000 inscriptions are known.
Influence on present-day languages   The Latin influence in English has been significant at all stages of its insular development.
In the Middle Ages , borrowing from Latin occurred from ecclesiastical usage established by Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the 6th century or indirectly after the Norman Conquest , through the Anglo-Norman language .
From the 16th to the 18th centuries, English writers cobbled together huge numbers of new words from Latin and Greek words, dubbed " inkhorn terms ", as if they had spilled from a pot of ink.
Many of these words were used once by the author and then forgotten, but some useful ones survived, such as 'imbibe' and 'extrapolate'.
Many of the most common polysyllabic English words are of Latin origin through the medium of Old French .
Romance words make respectively 59%, 20% and 14% of English, German and Dutch vocabularies.
Those figures can rise dramatically when only non-compound and non-derived words are included.
Range of the Romance languages, the modern descendants of Latin, in Europe.
The influence of Roman governance and Roman technology on the less-developed nations under Roman dominion led to the adoption of Latin phraseology in some specialized areas, such as science, technology, medicine, and law.
For example, the Linnaean system of plant and animal classification was heavily influenced by Historia Naturalis , an encyclopedia of people, places, plants, animals, and things published by Pliny the Elder .
Roman medicine, recorded in the works of such physicians as Galen , established that today's medical terminology would be primarily derived from Latin and Greek words, the Greek being filtered through the Latin.
Roman engineering had the same effect on scientific terminology as a whole.
Latin law principles have survived partly in a long list of Latin legal terms .
A few international auxiliary languages have been heavily influenced by Latin.
Interlingua is sometimes considered a simplified, modern version of the language.
Latino sine Flexione , popular in the early 20th century, is Latin with its inflections stripped away, among other grammatical changes.
The Logudorese dialect of the Sardinian language and Standard Italian are the two closest contemporary languages to Latin.
Education   A multivolume Latin dictionary in the University of Graz Library in Austria  Throughout European history, an education in the classics was considered crucial for those who wished to join literate circles.
This also was true in the United States where many of the nation's founders obtained a classically based education in grammar schools or from tutors.
Admission to Harvard in the Colonial era required that the applicant "Can readily make and speak or write true Latin prose and has skill in making verse .
."
Latin Study and the classics were emphasized in American secondary schools and colleges well into the Antebellum era.
Instruction in Latin is an essential aspect.
In today's world, a large number of Latin students in the US learn from Wheelock's Latin: The Classic Introductory Latin Course, Based on Ancient Authors .
This book, first published in 1956,  was written by Frederic M.
Wheelock , who received a PhD from Harvard University.
Wheelock's Latin has become the standard text for many American introductory Latin courses.
The numbers of people studying Latin varies significantly by country.
In the United Kingdom, Latin is available in around 2.3% of state primary schools, representing a significant increase in availability.
In Germany, over 500,000 students study Latin each year, representing a decrease from over 800,000 in 2008.
Latin is still required for some University courses, but this has become less frequent.
The Living Latin movement attempts to teach Latin in the same way that living languages are taught, as a means of both spoken and written communication.
It is available in Vatican City and at some institutions in the US, such as the University of Kentucky and Iowa State University .
The British Cambridge University Press is a major supplier of Latin textbooks for all levels, such as the Cambridge Latin Course series.
It has also published a subseries of children's texts in Latin by Bell & Forte, which recounts the adventures of a mouse called Minimus .
In the United Kingdom, the Classical Association encourages the study of antiquity through various means, such as publications and grants.
The University of Cambridge ,  the Open University ,  a number of independent schools, for example Eton , Harrow , Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School , Merchant Taylors' School , and Rugby , and The Latin Programme/Via Facilis,  a London-based charity, run Latin courses.
In the United States and in Canada, the American Classical League supports every effort to further the study of classics.
Its subsidiaries include the National Junior Classical League (with more than 50,000 members), which encourages high school students to pursue the study of Latin, and the National Senior Classical League , which encourages students to continue their study of the classics into college.
The league also sponsors the National Latin Exam .
Classicist Mary Beard wrote in The Times Literary Supplement in 2006 that the reason for learning Latin is because of what was written in it.
Official status   Latin was or is the official language of European states:   Hungary – Latin was an official language in the Kingdom of Hungary from the 11th century to the mid 19th century, when Hungarian became the exclusive official language in 1844.
The best known Latin language poet of Croatian-Hungarian origin was Janus Pannonius .
Croatia – Latin was the official language of Croatian Parliament (Sabor) from the 13th to the 19th century (1847).
The oldest preserved records of the parliamentary sessions ( Congregatio Regni totius Sclavonie generalis ) – held in Zagreb ( Zagabria ), Croatia – date from 19 April 1273.
An extensive Croatian Latin literature exists.
Latin was used on Croatian coins on even years until 1 January 2023, when Croatia adopted the Euro as its official currency.
Poland , Kingdom of Poland – officially recognised and widely used     between the 10th and 18th centuries, commonly used in foreign relations and popular as a second language among some of the nobility .
Phonology   Main article: Latin phonology and orthography  The ancient pronunciation of Latin has been reconstructed; among the data used for reconstruction are explicit statements about pronunciation by ancient authors, misspellings, puns, ancient etymologies, the spelling of Latin loanwords in other languages, and the historical development of Romance languages.
Consonants   The consonant phonemes of Classical Latin are as follows:       Labial   Dental   Palatal   Velar   Glottal    plain  labial    Plosive   voiced   b   d     ɡ   ɡʷ      voiceless   p   t     k   kʷ      Fricative   voiced     ( z )           voiceless   f   s         h    Nasal   m   n     ( ŋ )       Rhotic     r            Approximant     l   j     w     /z/ was not native to Classical Latin.
It appeared in Greek loanwords starting around the first century BC, when it was probably pronounced (at least by educated speakers)  initially and doubled   between vowels, in accordance with its pronunciation in Koine Greek .
In Classical Latin poetry, the letter ⟨ z ⟩ between vowels always counts as two consonants for metrical purposes.
The consonant ⟨b⟩ usually sounds as ; however, when ⟨t⟩ or ⟨s⟩ follows ⟨b⟩ then it is pronounced as in  or .
In Latin, ⟨q⟩ is always followed by the vowel ⟨u⟩.
Together they make a  sound.
In Old and Classical Latin, the Latin alphabet had no distinction between uppercase and lowercase , and the letters ⟨J U W⟩ did not exist.
In place of ⟨J U⟩ , ⟨I V⟩ were used, respectively; ⟨I V⟩ represented both vowels and consonants.
Most of the letter forms were similar to modern uppercase, as can be seen in the inscription from the Colosseum shown at the top of the article.
The spelling systems used in Latin dictionaries and modern editions of Latin texts, however, normally use ⟨j u⟩ in place of Classical-era ⟨i v⟩ .
Some systems use ⟨j v⟩ for the consonant sounds /j  w/ except in the combinations ⟨gu su qu⟩ for which ⟨v⟩ is never used.
Some notes concerning the mapping of Latin phonemes to English graphemes are given below:  Notes  Latin grapheme  Latin phoneme  English examples   ⟨c⟩ , ⟨k⟩      Always as k in sky ( /skaɪ/ )   ⟨t⟩      As t in stay ( /steɪ/ )   ⟨s⟩      As s in say ( /seɪ/ )   ⟨g⟩      Always as g in good ( /ɡʊd/ )      Before ⟨n⟩ , as ng in sing ( /sɪŋ/ )   ⟨n⟩      As n in man ( /mæn/ )      Before ⟨c⟩ , ⟨x⟩ , and ⟨g⟩ , as ng in sing ( /sɪŋ/ )   ⟨l⟩      When doubled ⟨ll⟩ and before ⟨i⟩ , as "light L" ,  in link (  ) ( l exilis )         In all other positions, as "dark L" ,  in bowl (  ) ( l pinguis )   ⟨qu⟩      Similar to qu in squint ( /skwɪnt/ )   ⟨u⟩      Sometimes at the beginning of a syllable, or after ⟨g⟩ and ⟨s⟩ , as /w/ in wine ( /waɪn/ )   ⟨i⟩      Sometimes at the beginning of a syllable, as y ( /j/ ) in yard ( /jɑɹd/ )      "y" ( /j/ ), in between vowels, becomes "i-y", being pronounced as parts of two separate syllables, as in capiō ( /kapiˈjo:/ )   ⟨x⟩      A letter representing ⟨c⟩ + ⟨s⟩ : as x in English axe ( /æks/ )  In Classical Latin, as in modern Italian, double consonant letters were pronounced as long consonant sounds distinct from short versions of the same consonants.
Thus the nn in Classical Latin annus "year" (and in Italian anno ) is pronounced as a doubled /nn/ as in English unnamed .
(In English, distinctive consonant length or doubling occurs only at the boundary between two words or morphemes , as in that example.)
Vowels   Simple vowels     Front  Central  Back   Close  iː  ɪ   ʊ  uː    Mid  eː  ɛ   ɔ  oː    Open   a  aː    In Classical Latin, ⟨U⟩ did not exist as a letter distinct from V; the written form ⟨V⟩ was used to represent both a vowel and a consonant.
⟨Y⟩ was adopted to represent upsilon in loanwords from Greek , but it was pronounced like ⟨u⟩ and ⟨i⟩ by some speakers.
It was also used in native Latin words by confusion with Greek words of similar meaning, such as sylva and ὕλη .
Classical Latin distinguished between long and short vowels .
Then, long vowels, except for ⟨i⟩ , were frequently marked using the apex , which was sometimes similar to an acute accent  ⟨Á É Ó V́ Ý⟩ .
Long /iː/ was written using a taller version of ⟨I⟩ , called i longa " long I ": ⟨ꟾ⟩ .
In modern texts, long vowels are often indicated by a macron  ⟨ā ē ī ō ū⟩ , and short vowels are usually unmarked except when it is necessary to distinguish between words, when they are marked with a breve  ⟨ă ĕ ĭ ŏ ŭ⟩ .
However, they would also signify a long vowel by writing the vowel larger than other letters in a word or by repeating the vowel twice in a row.
The acute accent, when it is used in modern Latin texts, indicates stress, as in Spanish, rather than length.
Although called long vowels, their exact quality in Classical Latin is different from short vowels.
The difference is described in the table below:  Pronunciation of Latin vowels  Latin grapheme  Latin phone  modern examples   ⟨a⟩      similar to the a in part (/paɹt/)      similar to the a in father (/fɑːðəɹ/)   ⟨e⟩      as e in pet (/pɛt/)      similar to e in hey (/heɪ/)   ⟨i⟩      as i in pit (/pɪt/)      similar to i in machine (/məʃiːn/)   ⟨o⟩      as o in port (/pɔɹt/)      similar to o in post (/poʊst/)   ⟨u⟩      as u in put (/pʊt/)      similar to ue in true (/tɹuː/)   ⟨y⟩      does not exist in English, closest approximation is the u in mule       does not exist in English, closest approximation is the u in cute   This difference in quality is posited by W.
Sidney Allen in his book Vox Latina .
However, Andrea Calabrese has disputed this assertion, based in part upon the observation that in Sardinian and some Lucanian dialects, each long and short vowel pair merged, as opposed to in Italo-Western languages in which short /i/ and /u/ merged with long /eː/ and /o:/ (c.f.
Latin 'siccus', Italian 'secco', and Sardinian 'siccu').
A vowel letter followed by ⟨m⟩ at the end of a word, or a vowel letter followed by ⟨n⟩ before ⟨s⟩ or ⟨f⟩ , represented a short nasal vowel , as in monstrum   .
Diphthongs   Classical Latin had several diphthongs .
The two most common were ⟨ae au⟩ .
⟨oe⟩ was fairly rare, and ⟨ui eu ei⟩ were very rare, at least in native Latin words.
There has also been debate over whether ⟨ui⟩ is truly a diphthong in Classical Latin, due to its rarity, absence in works of Roman grammarians, and the roots of Classical Latin words (i.e.
hui ce to huic , quoi to cui , etc.)
not matching or being similar to the pronunciation of classical words if ⟨ui⟩ were to be considered a diphthong.
The sequences sometimes did not represent diphthongs.
⟨ae⟩ and ⟨oe⟩ also represented a sequence of two vowels in different syllables in aēnus   "of bronze" and coēpit   "began", and ⟨au ui eu ei ou⟩ represented sequences of two vowels or of a vowel and one of the semivowels /j  w/ , in cavē   "beware!
", cuius   "whose", monuī   "I warned", solvī   "I released", dēlēvī   "I destroyed", eius   "his", and novus   "new".
Old Latin had more diphthongs, but most of them changed into long vowels in Classical Latin.
The Old Latin diphthong ⟨ai⟩ and the sequence ⟨āī⟩ became Classical ⟨ae⟩ .
Old Latin ⟨oi⟩ and ⟨ou⟩ changed to Classical ⟨ū⟩ , except in a few words whose ⟨oi⟩ became Classical ⟨oe⟩ .
These two developments sometimes occurred in different words from the same root: for instance, Classical poena "punishment" and pūnīre "to punish".
Early Old Latin ⟨ei⟩ usually monophthongized to a later Old Latin ⟨ē⟩ , to Classical ⟨ī⟩ .
By the late Roman Empire, ⟨ae oe⟩ had merged with ⟨e ē⟩ .
During the Classical period this sound change was present in some rural dialects, but deliberately avoided by well-educated speakers.
Diphthongs classified by beginning sound   Front  Back   Close   ui /ui̯/    Mid  ei /ei̯/ eu /eu̯/  oe /oe̯/ ou /ou̯/    Open  ae /ae̯/ au /au̯/   Syllables   Syllables in Latin are signified by the presence of diphthongs and vowels .
The number of syllables is the same as the number of vowel sounds.
Further, if a consonant separates two vowels, it will go into the syllable of the second vowel.
When there are two consonants between vowels, the last consonant will go with the second vowel.
An exception occurs when a phonetic stop and liquid come together.
In this situation, they are thought to be a single consonant, and as such, they will go into the syllable of the second vowel.
Length   Syllables in Latin are considered either long or short (less often called "heavy" and "light" respectively).
Within a word, a syllable may either be long by nature or long by position.
A syllable is long by nature if it has a diphthong or a long vowel.
On the other hand, a syllable is long by position if the vowel is followed by more than one consonant.
Stress   There are two rules that define which syllable is stressed in Classical Latin.
In a word with only two syllables, the emphasis will be on the first syllable.
In a word with more than two syllables, there are two cases.
If the second-to-last syllable is long, that syllable will have stress.
If the second-to-last syllable is not long, the syllable before that one will be stressed instead.
Orthography   Main article: Latin alphabet  The Duenos Inscription , from the 6th century BC, is one of the earliest known Old Latin texts.
It was found on the Quirinal Hill in Rome.
Latin was written in the Latin alphabet ( A , B , C , D , E , F , G , H , I , K , L , M , N , O , P , Q , R , S , T , V , X ), derived from the Etruscan alphabet , which was in turn drawn from the Greek alphabet and ultimately the Phoenician alphabet .
This alphabet has continued to be used over the centuries as the script for the Romance, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic, Finnic and many Slavic languages ( Polish , Slovak , Slovene , Croatian , Bosnian , Serbian and Czech ); and it has been adopted by many languages around the world, including Vietnamese , the Austronesian languages , many Turkic languages , and most languages in sub-Saharan Africa , the Americas and Oceania, making it by far the world's single most widely used writing system.
The number of letters in the Latin alphabet has varied.
When it was first derived from the Etruscan alphabet, it contained only 21 letters.
Later, G was added to represent /ɡ/ , which had previously been spelled C , and Z ceased to be included in the alphabet, as the language then had no voiced alveolar fricative .
The letters Y and Z were later added to represent Greek letters, upsilon and zeta respectively, in Greek loanwords.
W was created in the 11th century from VV .
It represented /w/ in Germanic languages, not Latin, which still uses V for the purpose.
J was distinguished from the original I only during the late Middle Ages, as was the letter U from V .
Although some Latin dictionaries use J , it is rarely used for Latin text, as it was not used in classical times, but many other languages use it.
Punctuation   Classical Latin did not contain sentence punctuation , letter case,  or interword spacing , but apices were sometimes used to distinguish length in vowels and the interpunct was used at times to separate words.
The first line of Catullus 3 ("Mourn, O Venuses and Cupids ") was originally written as:   simply  lv́géteóveneréscupidinésqve    with long I   lv́géteóveneréscupIdinésqve    with interpunct  lv́géte·ó·venerés·cupidinésqve   It would be rendered in a modern edition as:   simply  Lugete, o Veneres Cupidinesque    with macrons  Lūgēte, ō Venerēs Cupīdinēsque    with apices  Lúgéte, ó Venerés Cupídinésque   A modern Latin text written in the Old Roman Cursive inspired by the Vindolanda tablets , the oldest surviving handwritten documents in Britain.
The word Romani ('Romans') is at bottom left.
The Roman cursive script is commonly found on the many wax tablets excavated at sites such as forts, an especially extensive set having been discovered at Vindolanda on Hadrian's Wall in Britain .
Most notable is the fact that while most of the Vindolanda tablets show spaces between words, spaces were avoided in monumental inscriptions from that era.
Alternative scripts   Occasionally, Latin has been written in other scripts:  The Praeneste fibula is a 7th-century BC pin with an Old Latin inscription written using the Etruscan script.
The rear panel of the early 8th-century Franks Casket has an inscription that switches from Old English in Anglo-Saxon runes to Latin in Latin script and to Latin in runes.
Grammar   Main articles: Latin grammar and Latin syntax  Latin is a synthetic , fusional language in the terminology of linguistic typology.
Words involve an objective semantic element and markers (usually suffixes) specifying the grammatical use of the word, expressing gender , number , and case in adjectives , nouns , and pronouns ( declension ) and verbs to denote person , number , tense , voice , mood , and aspect ( conjugation ).
Some words are uninflected and undergo neither process, such as adverbs, prepositions, and interjections.
Latin inflection can result in words with much ambiguity: For example, amābit , "he/she/it will love", is formed from amā- , a future tense morpheme -bi- and a third person singular morpheme, -t , the last of which -t does not express masculine, feminine, or neuter gender.
A major task in understanding Latin phrases and clauses is to clarify such ambiguities by an analysis of context.
Nouns   Main article: Latin declension  A regular Latin noun belongs to one of five main declensions, a group of nouns with similar inflected forms.
The declensions are identified by the genitive singular form of the noun.
The first declension, with a predominant ending letter of a , is signified by the genitive singular ending of -ae .
The second declension, with a predominant ending letter of us , is signified by the genitive singular ending of -i .
The third declension, with a predominant ending letter of i , is signified by the genitive singular ending of -is .
The fourth declension, with a predominant ending letter of u , is signified by the genitive singular ending of -ūs .
The fifth declension, with a predominant ending letter of e , is signified by the genitive singular ending of -ei .
There are seven Latin noun cases, which also apply to adjectives and pronouns and mark a noun's syntactic role in the sentence by means of inflections.
Thus, word order is not as important in Latin as it is in English, which is less inflected.
The general structure and word order of a Latin sentence can therefore vary.
The cases are as follows:  Nominative – used when the noun is the subject or a predicate nominative .
The thing or person acting: the girl ran: puella cucurrit, or cucurrit puella  Genitive – used when the noun is the possessor of or connected with an object: "the horse of the man", or "the man's horse"; in both instances, the word man would be in the genitive case when it is translated into Latin.
It also indicates the partitive , in which the material is quantified: "a group of people"; "a number of gifts": people and gifts would be in the genitive case.
Some nouns are genitive with special verbs and adjectives: The cup is full of wine.
( Poculum plēnum vīnī est.
)
The master of the slave had beaten him.
( Dominus servī eum verberāverat.
)
Dative – used when the noun is the indirect object of the sentence, with special verbs, with certain prepositions, and if it is used as agent, reference, or even possessor: The merchant hands the stola to the woman.
( Mercātor fēminae stolam trādit.
)
Accusative – used when the noun is the direct object of the subject, as the object of a preposition demonstrating place to which, and sometimes to indicate a duration of time: The man killed the boy.
( Vir puerum necāvit.
)
Ablative – used when the noun demonstrates separation or movement from a source, cause, agent or instrument or when the noun is used as the object of certain prepositions, and to indicate a specific place in time.
; adverbial: You walked with the boy.
( Cum puerō ambulāvistī.
)
Vocative – used when the noun is used in a direct address.
The vocative form of a noun is often the same as the nominative, with the exception of second-declension nouns ending in -us .
The -us becomes an -e in the vocative singular.
If it ends in -ius (such as fīlius ), the ending is just -ī ( filī ), as distinct from the nominative plural ( filiī ) in the vocative singular: "Master!"
shouted the slave.
( "Domine!"
clāmāvit servus.
)
Locative – used to indicate a location (corresponding to the English "in" or "at").
It is far less common than the other six cases of Latin nouns and usually applies to cities and small towns and islands along with a few common nouns, such as the words domus (house), humus (ground), and rus (country).
In the singular of the first and second declensions, its form coincides with the genitive ( Roma becomes Romae , "in Rome").
In the plural of all declensions and the singular of the other declensions, it coincides with the ablative ( Athēnae becomes Athēnīs , "at Athens").
In the fourth-declension word domus , the locative form, domī ("at home") differs from the standard form of all other cases.
Latin lacks both definite and indefinite articles so puer currit can mean either "the boy is running" or "a boy is running".
Adjectives   Main article: Latin declension § Adjectives  There are two types of regular Latin adjectives: first- and second-declension and third-declension.
They are so-called because their forms are similar or identical to first- and second-declension and third-declension nouns, respectively.
Latin adjectives also have comparative and superlative forms.
There are also a number of Latin participles .
Latin numbers are sometimes declined as adjectives.
See Numbers below.
First- and second-declension adjectives are declined like first-declension nouns for the feminine forms and like second-declension nouns for the masculine and neuter forms.
For example, for mortuus, mortua, mortuum (dead), mortua is declined like a regular first-declension noun (such as puella (girl)), mortuus is declined like a regular second-declension masculine noun (such as dominus (lord, master)), and mortuum is declined like a regular second-declension neuter noun (such as auxilium (help)).
Third-declension adjectives are mostly declined like normal third-declension nouns, with a few exceptions.
In the plural nominative neuter, for example, the ending is -ia ( omnia (all, everything)), and for third-declension nouns, the plural nominative neuter ending is -a or -ia ( capita (heads), animalia (animals)) They can have one, two or three forms for the masculine, feminine, and neuter nominative singular.
Participles   Latin participles, like English participles, are formed from a verb.
There are a few main types of participles: Present Active Participles, Perfect Passive Participles, Future Active Participles, and Future Passive Participles.
Prepositions   Latin sometimes uses prepositions, depending on the type of prepositional phrase being used.
Most prepositions are followed by a noun in either the accusative or ablative case: "apud puerum" (with the boy), with "puerum" being the accusative form of "puer", boy, and "sine puero" (without the boy), "puero" being the ablative form of "puer".
A few adpositions , however, govern a noun in the genitive (such as "gratia" and "tenus").
Verbs   Main articles: Latin grammar and Latin conjugation  A regular verb in Latin belongs to one of four main conjugations .
A conjugation is "a class of verbs with similar inflected forms."
The conjugations are identified by the last letter of the verb's present stem.
The present stem can be found by omitting the - re (- rī in deponent verbs) ending from the present infinitive form.
The infinitive of the first conjugation ends in -ā-re or -ā-ri (active and passive respectively): amāre , "to love", hortārī , "to exhort"; of the second conjugation by -ē-re or -ē-rī : monēre , "to warn", verērī , "to fear;" of the third conjugation by -ere , -ī : dūcere , "to lead", ūtī , "to use"; of the fourth by -ī-re , -ī-rī : audīre , "to hear", experīrī , "to attempt".
The stem categories descend from Indo-European and can therefore be compared to similar conjugations in other Indo-European languages.
Irregular verbs are verbs that do not follow the regular conjugations in the formation of the inflected form.
Irregular verbs in Latin are esse , "to be"; velle , "to want"; ferre , "to carry"; edere , "to eat"; dare , "to give"; ire , "to go"; posse , "to be able"; fieri , "to happen"; and their compounds.
There are six general tenses in Latin (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect and future perfect), three moods (indicative, imperative and subjunctive, in addition to the infinitive , participle , gerund , gerundive and supine ), three persons (first, second and third), two numbers (singular and plural), two voices (active and passive) and two aspects ( perfective and imperfective ).
Verbs are described by four principal parts:  The first principal part is the first-person singular, present tense, active voice, indicative mood form of the verb.
If the verb is impersonal, the first principal part will be in the third-person singular.
The second principal part is the present active infinitive.
The third principal part is the first-person singular, perfect active indicative form.
Like the first principal part, if the verb is impersonal, the third principal part will be in the third-person singular.
The fourth principal part is the supine form, or alternatively, the nominative singular of the perfect passive participle form of the verb.
The fourth principal part can show one gender of the participle or all three genders (- us for masculine, - a for feminine and - um for neuter) in the nominative singular.
The fourth principal part will be the future participle if the verb cannot be made passive.
Most modern Latin dictionaries, if they show only one gender, tend to show the masculine; but many older dictionaries instead show the neuter, as it coincides with the supine.
The fourth principal part is sometimes omitted for intransitive verbs, but strictly in Latin, they can be made passive if they are used impersonally, and the supine exists for such verbs.
The six tenses of Latin are divided into two tense systems: the present system, which is made up of the present, imperfect and future tenses, and the perfect system, which is made up of the perfect, pluperfect and future perfect tenses.
Each tense has a set of endings corresponding to the person, number, and voice of the subject.
Subject (nominative) pronouns are generally omitted for the first ( I, we ) and second ( you ) persons except for emphasis.
The table below displays the common inflected endings for the indicative mood in the active voice in all six tenses.
For the future tense, the first listed endings are for the first and second conjugations, and the second listed endings are for the third and fourth conjugations:   Tense  Singular  Plural   1st Person  2nd Person  3rd Person  1st Person  2nd Person  3rd Person   Present  -ō/m  -s  -t  -mus  -tis  -nt   Future  -bō, -am  -bis, -ēs  -bit, -et  -bimus, -ēmus  -bitis, -ētis  -bunt, -ent   Imperfect  -bam  -bās  -bat  -bāmus  -bātis  -bant   Perfect  -ī  -istī  -it  -imus  -istis  -ērunt   Future Perfect  -erō  -eris/erīs  -erit  -erimus/-erīmus  -eritis/-erītis  -erint   Pluperfect  -eram  -erās  -erat  -erāmus  -erātis  -erant  Deponent verbs   Some Latin verbs are deponent , causing their forms to be in the passive voice but retain an active meaning: hortor, hortārī, hortātus sum (to urge).
Vocabulary   As Latin is an Italic language, most of its vocabulary is likewise Italic, ultimately from the ancestral Proto-Indo-European language .
However, because of close cultural interaction, the Romans not only adapted the Etruscan alphabet to form the Latin alphabet but also borrowed some Etruscan words into their language, including persona "mask" and histrio "actor".
Latin also included vocabulary borrowed from Oscan , another Italic language.
After the Fall of Tarentum (272 BC), the Romans began Hellenising, or adopting features of Greek culture, including the borrowing of Greek words, such as camera (vaulted roof), sumbolum (symbol), and balineum (bath).
This Hellenisation led to the addition of "Y" and "Z" to the alphabet to represent Greek sounds.
Subsequently, the Romans transplanted Greek art , medicine, science and philosophy to Italy, paying almost any price to entice Greek skilled and educated persons to Rome and sending their youth to be educated in Greece.
Thus, many Latin scientific and philosophical words were Greek loanwords or had their meanings expanded by association with Greek words, as ars (craft) and τέχνη (art).
Because of the Roman Empire's expansion and subsequent trade with outlying European tribes, the Romans borrowed some northern and central European words, such as beber (beaver), of Germanic origin, and bracae (breeches), of Celtic origin.
The specific dialects of Latin across Latin-speaking regions of the former Roman Empire after its fall were influenced by languages specific to the regions.
The dialects of Latin evolved into different Romance languages.
During and after the adoption of Christianity into Roman society, Christian vocabulary became a part of the language, either from Greek or Hebrew borrowings or as Latin neologisms.
Continuing into the Middle Ages, Latin incorporated many more words from surrounding languages, including Old English and other Germanic languages .
Over the ages, Latin-speaking populations produced new adjectives, nouns, and verbs by affixing or compounding meaningful segments .
For example, the compound adjective, omnipotens , "all-powerful", was produced from the adjectives omnis , "all", and potens , "powerful", by dropping the final s of omnis and concatenating.
Often, the concatenation changed the part of speech, and nouns were produced from verb segments or verbs from nouns and adjectives.
Conversational phrases   This section needs editing to comply with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .
In particular, it has problems with MOS:WORDSASWORDS .
Please help improve the content .
( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Main article: List of Latin phrases  The phrases are here written with macrons, from which it is easy to calculate where stress is placed.
salvē  to one person / salvēte  to more than one person – hello  havē  to one person / havēte  to more than one person – greetings.
havē is a loanword from Carthaginian 𐤇𐤅𐤉 and it may be spelled without the H, as in the prayer Avē Marīa ( Hail Mary )  valē  to one person / valēte  to more than one person – goodbye  cūrā ut valeās – take care  quōmodo valēs?
, ut valēs?
– how are you?
bene (valeō) – good, I'm fine  male (valeō) – bad, I'm not good  quaesō – please  amābō tē – please (idiomatic, the literal meaning is I will love you )  libenter – you're welcome  Latin has no words that truly translate yes or no , so it is usual to just repeat the core point of the question (usually the verb), but one may also use the following adverbs as well: ita , ita est , ita vērō , sīc est , etiam – All meaning yes , but also more literally it is so , indeed  minimē – not at all  grātiās tibi (agō) – thank you, in singular (use vōbīs instead of tibi for the plural)  magnās/maximās grātiās (agō) , magnās grātiās agō – thank you very much  quā aetāte es?/quantōrum annōrum es?
– how old are you?
XX annōs nātus/a sum / XX annōrum sum – I am XX years old  ubi est lātrīna?
– where is the toilet?
loquērisne/loquiminī ...?
– do you speak ...?
(singular and plural).
This is then followed by an adverb of the language, some of which are listed below: Latīnē (Latin), Graecē (Greek), Anglicē (English), Theodiscē/Germānicē (German), Ītalicē (Italian), Gallicē/Francēnse  (French), Russicē (Russian), Hispānicē (Spanish), Lūsītānicē (Portuguese), Dācorōmānice/Vālāchice (Romanian), Sēricē/Sīnicē (Chinese), Iapōnicē (Japanese), Hebraicē (Hebrew), Arabicē (Arabic), Hindicē (Hindi)  amō tē / tē amō – I love you  Numbers   This section does not cite any sources .
( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message )  Further information: Latin numerals (linguistics)  In ancient times, numbers in Latin were written only with letters.
Today, the numbers can be written with the Arabic numbers as well as with Roman numerals .
The numbers 1, 2 and 3 and every whole hundred from 200 to 900 are declined as nouns and adjectives, with some differences.
ūnus, ūna, ūnum (masculine, feminine, neuter)  I  one   duo, duae, duo (m., f., n.)  II  two   trēs, tria (m./f., n.)  III  three   quattuor   IIII or IV  four   quīnque   V  five   sex   VI  six   septem   VII  seven   octō   IIX or VIII  eight   novem   VIIII or IX  nine   decem   X  ten   quīnquāgintā   L  fifty   centum   C  one hundred   quīngentī, quīngentae, quīngenta (m., f., n.)  D  five hundred   mīlle   M  one thousand  The numbers from 4 to 100 do not change their endings.
As in modern descendants such as Spanish, the gender for naming a number in isolation is masculine, so that "1, 2, 3" is counted as ūnus, duo, trēs .
Example text   Commentarii de Bello Gallico , also called De Bello Gallico ( The Gallic War ), written by Gaius Julius Caesar , begins with the following passage:  Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur.
Hi omnes lingua, institutis, legibus inter se differunt.
Gallos ab Aquitanis Garumna flumen, a Belgis Matrona et Sequana dividit.
Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae, propterea quod a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important, proximique sunt Germanis, qui trans Rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt.
Qua de causa Helvetii quoque reliquos Gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum Germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipsi in eorum finibus bellum gerunt.
Eorum una pars, quam Gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine Rhodano, continetur Garumna flumine, Oceano, finibus Belgarum; attingit etiam ab Sequanis et Helvetiis flumen Rhenum; vergit ad septentriones.
Belgae ab extremis Galliae finibus oriuntur; pertinent ad inferiorem partem fluminis Rheni; spectant in septentrionem et orientem solem.
Aquitania a Garumna flumine ad Pyrenaeos montes et eam partem Oceani quae est ad Hispaniam pertinet; spectat inter occasum solis et septentriones.
The same text may be marked for all long vowels (before any possible elisions at word boundary) with apices over vowel letters, including customarily before "nf" and "ns" where a long vowel is automatically produced:  Gallia est omnis dívísa in partés trés, quárum únam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquítání, tertiam quí ipsórum linguá Celtae, nostrá Gallí appellantur.
Hí omnés linguá, ínstitútís, légibus inter sé differunt.
Gallós ab Aquítánís Garumna flúmen, á Belgís Mátrona et Séquana dívidit.
Hórum omnium fortissimí sunt Belgae, proptereá quod á cultú atque húmánitáte próvinciae longissimé absunt, miniméque ad eós mercátórés saepe commeant atque ea quae ad efféminandós animós pertinent important, proximíque sunt Germánís, quí tráns Rhénum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt.
Quá dé causá Helvétií quoque reliquós Gallós virtúte praecédunt, quod feré cotídiánís proeliís cum Germánís contendunt, cum aut suís fínibus eós prohibent aut ipsí in eórum fínibus bellum gerunt.
Eórum úna pars, quam Gallós obtinére dictum est, initium capit á flúmine Rhodanó, continétur Garumná flúmine, Óceanó, fínibus Belgárum; attingit etiam ab Séquanís et Helvétiís flúmen Rhénum; vergit ad septentriónés.
Belgae ab extrémís Galliae fínibus oriuntur; pertinent ad ínferiórem partem flúminis Rhéní; spectant in septentriónem et orientem sólem.
Aquítánia á Garumná flúmine ad Pýrénaeós montés et eam partem Óceaní quae est ad Hispániam pertinet; spectat inter occásum sólis et septentriónés.
Symbol used in mathematics and typography  Various forms of the end-of-proof symbol  In mathematics, the tombstone , halmos , end-of-proof , or Q.E.D.
symbol "∎" (or "□") is a symbol used to denote the end of a proof , in place of the traditional abbreviation "Q.E.D."
for the Latin phrase " quod erat demonstrandum ".
It is inspired by the typographic practice of end marks , an element that marks the end of an article.
In Unicode , it is represented as character U+220E  ∎  END OF PROOF .
Its graphic form varies, as it may be a hollow or filled rectangle or square.
In AMS-LaTeX , the symbol is automatically appended at the end of a proof environment \begin{proof} ...
\end{proof} .
It can also be obtained from the commands \qedsymbol , \qedhere or \qed (the latter causes the symbol to be right aligned).
It is sometimes called a "Halmos finality symbol" or "halmos" after the mathematician Paul Halmos , who first used it in a mathematical context in 1950.
He got the idea of using it from seeing end marks in magazines , that is, typographic signs that indicate the end of an article.
In his memoir I Want to Be a Mathematician , he wrote the following:    The symbol is definitely not my invention — it appeared in popular magazines (not mathematical ones) before I adopted it, but, once again, I seem to have introduced it into mathematics.
It is the symbol that sometimes looks like ▯, and is used to indicate an end, usually the end of a proof.
It is most frequently called the 'tombstone', but at least one generous author referred to it as the 'halmos'.
Person or thing after which something is named  "Eponymous" redirects here.
For the album, see Eponymous (album) .
"Self-titled" redirects here.
For other uses, see Self-titled (disambiguation) .
Not to be confused with Namesake .
The mythological Greek hero Orion is the eponym of the constellation Orion , shown here, and thus indirectly of the Orion spacecraft .
An eponym is a person, a place, or a thing after whom or which someone or something is, or is believed to be, named.
The adjectives which are derived from the word eponym include eponymous and eponymic .
Usage of the word   The term eponym   functions in multiple related ways, all based on an explicit relationship between two named things.
A person, place, or thing named after a particular person share an eponymous relationship.
In this way, Elizabeth I of England is the eponym of the Elizabethan era , but the Elizabethan era can also be referred to as the eponym of Elizabeth I of England .
When Henry Ford is referred to as "the eponymous founder of the Ford Motor Company ", his surname "Ford" and the name of the motor company have an eponymous relationship.
The word "eponym" can also refer to the title character of a fictional work (such as Rocky Balboa of the Rocky film series ), as well as to self-titled works named after their creators (such as the album The Doors by the band the Doors ).
Walt Disney created the eponymous Walt Disney Company , with his name similarly extended to theme parks such as Walt Disney World .
Medical eponymous terms are often called medical eponyms although that usage is deprecable .
History   Periods have often been named after a ruler or other influential figure:  One of the first recorded cases of eponymy occurred in the second millennium BC, when the Assyrians named each year after a high official ( limmu ).
In ancient Greece , the eponymous archon was the highest magistrate in classical Athens .
Eponymous archons served a term of one year which took the name of that particular archon (e.g., 594 BC was named after Solon ).
Later historians provided yet another case of eponymy by referring to the period of fifth-century Athens as The Age of Pericles after its most influential statesman Pericles .
In Ptolemaic Egypt , the head priest of the Cult of Alexander and the Ptolemies was the eponymous priest after whom years were named.
The Hebrew Bible explains the origins of peoples through individuals who bear their name.
Jacob is renamed "Israel" (Gen 35:9) and his sons (or grandsons) name the original 12 tribes of Israel , while Edomites (Gen.
25:30), Moabites and Ammonites (Gen.
19:30-38), Canaanites (Gen.
9:20-27) and other tribes (the Kenites named after Cain  (Cain's life is detailed in Gen.
4:1-16)) are said to be named after other primal ancestors bearing their name.
In most cases, the experiences and behavior of the ancestor is meant to indicate the characteristics of the people who take their name.
In ancient Rome , one of the two formal ways of indicating a year was to cite the two annual consuls who served in that year.
For example, the year we know as 59 BC would have been described as "the consulship of Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus and Gaius Julius Caesar " (although that specific year was known jocularly as "the consulship of Julius and Caesar" because of the insignificance of Caesar's counterpart).
Under the empire, the consuls would change as often as every two months, but only the two consuls at the beginning of the year would lend their names to that year.
During the Christian era , itself eponymous, many royal households used eponymous dating by regnal years .
The Roman Catholic Church, however, eventually used the Anno Domini dating scheme - based on the birth of Christ - on both the general public and royalty.
The regnal year standard is still used with respect to statutes and law reports published in some parts of the United Kingdom and in some Commonwealth countries (England abandoned this practice in 1963).
Government administrations may become referred to eponymously, such as Kennedy's Camelot and the Nixon Era .
British monarchs have become eponymous throughout the English-speaking world for time periods, fashions, etc.
Elizabethan , Georgian , Victorian , and Edwardian are examples of these.
Trends   Political trends or movements are often named after a government leader.
Examples include Jacksonian democracy , Stalinism , Maoism , Obamacare , and Thatcherism .
Other eponyms   In intellectual property law , an eponym can refer to a generic trademark or brand name, a form of metonymy , such as aspirin ,   heroin  and thermos  in the United States.
In geography, places and towns can also be given an eponymous name through a relationship to an important figure.
Peloponnesus , for instance, was said to derive its name from the Greek hero Pelops .
In historical times, new towns have often been named (and older communities renamed) after their founders, discoverers, or notable individuals.
Examples include Vancouver, British Columbia , named after explorer George Vancouver ; and Prince Albert, Saskatchewan , originally called Isbister's Settlement but renamed after Queen Victoria 's husband and consort in 1866.
In science and technology: Discoveries and innovations are often named after the discoverer or a figure influential in their advance.
Examples are the Avogadro constant , the Diesel engine , meitnerium , Alzheimer's disease , and the Apgar score .
For a different view of the process see Stigler's law of eponymy .
In biological nomenclature , organisms often receive scientific names that honor a person.
Examples are the plant Linnaea (after Carl Linnaeus ), the baobab Adansonia (after Michel Adanson ), and the moth Caligula (after the Roman emperor Caligula ).
Relatedly, biomedical terminology uses many eponymous terms , and many also have noneponymous synonyms.
Many astronomical objects are named after their discoverer or another person.
In art: Plays, books, and other forms of entertainment may have eponymous names, such as the ancient Greek epic The Odyssey , derived from its principal character, Odysseus , and the novel Robinson Crusoe .
The term is also used in the music industry , usually with regard to record titles, where it is prevalent and leads to confusion.
For example, Bad Company 's first album was entitled Bad Company and contained a popular song named " Bad Company ".
Parodying this, the band R.E.M.
titled a 1988 compilation album Eponymous .
One especially convoluted case of eponyms is the 1969 song " Black Sabbath ", named after the 1963 movie Black Sabbath ; the band that wrote the song changed their name to Black Sabbath and released it on the album Black Sabbath .
In tribal antiquity, both in ancient Greece and independently among the Hebrews, tribes often took the name of a legendary leader (as Achaeus for Achaeans , or Dorus for Dorians ).
The eponym gave apparent meaning to the mysterious names of tribes, and sometimes, as in the Sons of Noah , provided a primitive attempt at ethnology as well, in the genealogical relationships of eponymous originators.
Orthographic conventions   Capitalized versus lowercase   Because proper nouns are capitalized in English, the usual default for eponyms is to capitalize the eponymous part of a term.
When used as proper adjectives they are normally capitalized, for example Victorian , Shakespearean , and Kafkaesque .
However, some eponymous adjectives and noun adjuncts are nowadays entered in many dictionaries as lowercase when they have evolved a common status, no longer deriving their meaning from the proper-noun origin.
For example, Herculean when referring to Hercules himself, but often herculean when referring to the figurative, generalized extension sense;  and quixotic and diesel engine .
For any given term, one dictionary may enter only lowercase or only cap, whereas other dictionaries may recognize the capitalized version as a variant, either equally common as, or less common than, the first-listed styling (marked with labels such as "or", "also", "often", or "sometimes").
The Chicago Manual of Style , in its section "Words derived from proper names",  gives some examples of both lowercase and capitalized stylings, including a few terms styled both ways, and says, "Authors and editors must decide for themselves, but whatever choice is made should be followed consistently throughout a work."
When the eponym is used together with a noun, the common-noun part is not capitalized (unless it is part of a title or it is the first word in a sentence).
For example, in Parkinson disease (named after James Parkinson ), Parkinson is capitalized, but disease is not.
In addition, the adjectival form, where one exists, is usually lowercased for medical terms (thus parkinsonian although Parkinson disease ),  and gram-negative , gram-positive although Gram stain .
Uppercase Gram-positive or Gram-negative however are also commonly used in scientific journal articles and publications.
In other fields, the eponym derivative is commonly capitalized, for example, Newtonian in physics,   and Platonic in philosophy (however, use lowercase platonic when describing love).
The capitalization is retained after a prefix and hyphen, e.g.
non-Newtonian .
For examples, see the comparison table below.
Genitive versus attributive   English can use either genitive case or attributive position to indicate the adjectival nature of the eponymous part of the term.
(In other words, that part may be either possessive or non-possessive.)
Thus Parkinson's disease and Parkinson disease are both acceptable.
Medical dictionaries have been shifting toward nonpossessive styling in recent decades.
Thus Parkinson disease is more likely to be used in the latest medical literature (especially in postprints ) than Parkinson's disease .
National varieties of English   American and British English spelling differences may apply to eponyms.
For example, British style would typically be caesarean section , which is also found in American medical publications, but cæsarean section (with a ligature) is sometimes seen in (mostly older) British writing, and cesarean is preferred by American dictionaries and some American medical works.
Comparison table of eponym orthographic styling    Prevalent dictionary styling today  Stylings that defy prevalent dictionary styling  Comments   Addison disease   *Addison D isease * a ddison disease     Allemann syndrome   *Allemann S yndrome * a llemann syndrome     cesarean   cesarean also cesarian   cesarean, "often capitalized" or caesarean also cesarian or caesarian     More information on this word's orthographic variants is at Wiktionary: caesarean section .
darwinian   darwinism   Darwinian    Darwinism    Darwinist          diesel (n/adj/vi)    and also diesel-electric  diesel engine   dieseling   dieselize, dieselization   * D iesel engine * D ieseling * D ieselize, D ieselization     draconian  draconian often Draconian        eustachian   eustachian often Eustachian  eustachian tube   eustachian tube often Eustachian tube  eustachian tube or Eustachian tube   *Eustachian T ube     fallopian   fallopian often Fallopian  fallopian tube   fallopian tube often Fallopian tube  fallopian tube also Fallopian tube   *Fallopian T ube     Marxism    Marxist     * m arxism * m arxist     mendelian    or Mendelian   mendelian inheritance    or Mendelian inheritance     but Mendel's laws    * M endelian I nheritance     Newtonian     * n ewtonian     parkinsonism    parkinsonian    parkinsonian tremor  Parkinson disease   Parkinson's disease    * P arkinsonism * P arkinsonian * P arkinsonian tremor * P arkinsonian T remor *Parkinson D isease *Parkinson's D isease     quixotic     * Q uixotic     Roman numerals  roman numerals     AMA Manual of Style lowercases the terms roman numerals and arabic numerals .
MWCD enters the numeral sense under the headword Roman but with the note "not cap" on the numeral sense.
Lists of eponyms   By person's name   List of eponyms (A–K)  List of eponyms (L–Z)  By category    Adages  Adjectives  Asteroids  Astronomical objects  Cartoon characters  Chemical elements  Colleges and universities  Companies  Diseases  Foods  Human anatomical parts  Ideologies  Inventions  Mathematical theorems  Medical signs  Medical treatments  Minerals  Observations  Places and political entities  Prizes, awards and medals  Scientific constants  Scientific equations  Scientific laws  Scientific phenomena  Scientific units  Sports terms  Surgical procedures  Tests  Trademarks or brand names  Hungarian-American mathematician (1916–2006)  "Halmos" redirects here.
For the mathematical symbol, see Tombstone (typography) .
For the church music composer, see László Halmos .
The native form of this personal name is Halmos Pál .
Paul Halmos Born Paul Richard Halmos ( 1916-03-03 ) March 3, 1916 Budapest , Austria-Hungary Died October 2, 2006 (2006-10-02) (aged 90) Los Gatos, California , U.S.
Nationality Hungarian American Alma mater University of Illinois Awards Chauvenet Prize  (1947) Lester R.
Ford Award (1971,1977) Leroy P.
Steele Prize  (1983) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions Syracuse University University of Chicago University of Michigan Indiana University Santa Clara University Doctoral advisor Joseph L.
Doob Doctoral students Errett Bishop Bernard Galler Donald Sarason V.
S.
Sunder Peter Rosenthal   Paul Richard Halmos ( Hungarian : Halmos Pál ; March 3, 1916 – October 2, 2006) was a Hungarian -born American  mathematician and statistician who made fundamental advances in the areas of mathematical logic , probability theory , statistics , operator theory , ergodic theory , and functional analysis (in particular, Hilbert spaces ).
He was also recognized as a great mathematical expositor.
He has been described as one of The Martians .
Early life and education   Born in Hungary into a Jewish family, Halmos arrived in the U.S. at 13 years of age.
He obtained his B.A.
from the University of Illinois , majoring in mathematics, but fulfilling the requirements for both a math and philosophy degree.
He took only three years to obtain the degree, and was only 19 when he graduated.
He then began a Ph.D. in philosophy, still at the Champaign–Urbana campus; but, after failing his masters' oral exams,  he shifted to mathematics, graduating in 1938.
Joseph L.
Doob supervised his dissertation, titled Invariants of Certain Stochastic Transformations: The Mathematical Theory of Gambling Systems .
Career   Shortly after his graduation, Halmos left for the Institute for Advanced Study , lacking both job and grant money.
Six months later, he was working under John von Neumann , which proved a decisive experience.
While at the Institute, Halmos wrote his first book, Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces , which immediately established his reputation as a fine expositor of mathematics.
From 1967 to 1968 he was the Donegall Lecturer in Mathematics at Trinity College Dublin .
Halmos taught at Syracuse University , the University of Chicago (1946–60), the University of Michigan (~1961–67), the University of Hawaii (1967–68), Indiana University (1969–85), and the University of California at Santa Barbara (1976–78).
From his 1985 retirement from Indiana until his death, he was affiliated with the Mathematics department at Santa Clara University (1985–2006).
Accomplishments   In a series of papers reprinted in his 1962 Algebraic Logic , Halmos devised polyadic algebras , an algebraic version of first-order logic differing from the better known cylindric algebras of Alfred Tarski and his students.
An elementary version of polyadic algebra is described in monadic Boolean algebra .
In addition to his original contributions to mathematics, Halmos was an unusually clear and engaging expositor of university mathematics.
He won the Lester R.
Ford Award in 1971  and again in 1977 (shared with W.
P.
Ziemer, W.
H.
Wheeler, S.
H.
Moolgavkar, J.
H.
Ewing and W.
H.
Gustafson).
Halmos chaired the American Mathematical Society committee that wrote the AMS style guide for academic mathematics, published in 1973.
In 1983, he received the AMS's Leroy P.
Steele Prize for exposition.
In the American Scientist 56(4): 375–389, Halmos argued that mathematics is a creative art, and that mathematicians should be seen as artists, not number crunchers.
He discussed the division of the field into mathology and mathophysics, further arguing that mathematicians and painters think and work in related ways.
Halmos's 1985 "automathography" I Want to Be a Mathematician is an account of what it was like to be an academic mathematician in 20th century America.
He called the book "automathography" rather than "autobiography", because its focus is almost entirely on his life as a mathematician, not his personal life.
The book contains the following quote on Halmos' view of what doing mathematics means:  Don't just read it; fight it!
Ask your own questions, look for your own examples, discover your own proofs.
Is the hypothesis necessary?
Is the converse true?
What happens in the classical special case?
What about the degenerate cases?
Where does the proof use the hypothesis?
What does it take to be ?
I think I know the answer: you have to be born right, you must continually strive to become perfect, you must love mathematics more than anything else, you must work at it hard and without stop, and you must never give up.
— Paul Halmos, 1985   In these memoirs, Halmos claims to have invented the "iff" notation for the words " if and only if " and to have been the first to use the "tombstone" notation to signify the end of a proof ,  and this is generally agreed to be the case.
The tombstone symbol ∎ ( Unicode U+220E) is sometimes called a halmos .
In 2005, Halmos and his wife Virginia funded the Euler Book Prize , an annual award given by the Mathematical Association of America for a book that is likely to improve the view of mathematics among the public.
The first prize was given in 2007, the 300th anniversary of Leonhard Euler 's birth, to John Derbyshire for his book about Bernhard Riemann and the Riemann hypothesis : Prime Obsession .
In 2009 George Csicsery featured Halmos in a documentary film also called I Want to Be a Mathematician .
Books by Halmos   Books by Halmos have led to so many reviews that lists have been assembled.
Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces .
Springer-Verlag.
Measure Theory .
Springer Verlag.
1951.
Introduction to Hilbert Space and the Theory of Spectral Multiplicity .
Chelsea.
1956.
Lectures on Ergodic Theory .
1960.
Naive Set Theory .
1962.
Algebraic Logic .
1963.
Lectures on Boolean Algebras .
Van Nostrand.
1967.
A Hilbert Space Problem Book .
1973.
(with Norman E.
Steenrod , Menahem M.
Schiffer , and Jean A.
Dieudonne ).
How to Write Mathematics .
ISBN  978-0-8218-0055-3  1978.
(with V.
S.
Sunder ).
Bounded Integral Operators on L² Spaces .
Springer Verlag   1985.
I Want to Be a Mathematician .
I Have a Photographic Memory .
1991.
Problems for Mathematicians, Young and Old , Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, Mathematical Association of America.
1996.
Linear Algebra Problem Book , Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, Mathematical Association of America.
(with Steven Givant).
Logic as Algebra , Dolciani Mathematical Expositions No.
21, Mathematical Association of America.
(posthumous, with Steven Givant), Introduction to Boolean Algebras ,  Springer.
